URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/live/cgrkv8e8l9qt
Retrieval note: Fetched via Exa 2026-07-20 ~08:15 BST. BBC News live page "Andy Burnham to become PM as Keir Starmer prepares to leave No 10". APPROVED SOURCE (bbc.com).

Andy Burnham will become the UK's next prime minister today, replacing Keir Starmer.
Starmer will deliver his final address to the nation as PM later this morning, and Burnham his first, on the steps of No 10.
Both will visit King Charles III in Buckingham Palace - he will first be offered Starmer's resignation, then ask Burnham to form a government.
Burnham, who was elected as the MP for Makerfield last month, was selected without facing a challenge from any other Labour MP and officially became leader of the party on Friday.

Post at 05:01 BST: "Andy Burnham to be made new UK prime minister". Nearly a month after he was sworn back into Parliament, Andy Burnham will today become our new prime minister. Burnham's appointment is the culmination of a whirlwind 10 weeks for the Labour Party; the result of a catastrophic performance in local elections in England and parliamentary votes in Scotland and Wales back in May.
After repeated assurances he would hold on to the top job, Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer announced he would step down on 22 June - four days after Burnham won a Westminster seat.
Starmer's resignation triggered what ended up being a one-candidate race to No 10, with 379 Labour MPs nominating the former Greater Manchester mayor to become the new party leader - and, ultimately, the new PM.
Both Starmer and Burnham are expected to travel to Buckingham Palace later this morning - the former to formally resign and the latter to be invited to form a government.
All eyes will now be on the incoming prime minister and his choices for cabinet. Following his appointment as Labour leader on Friday, he said he had yet to decide who will be in his top team.

STATUS AS OF ~08:15 BST: Handover NOT yet completed. Starmer still caretaker PM. Palace audiences and speeches still to come "later this morning" / "around lunchtime".
