https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cm4g13dqwj7zo
HTTP: 200
headline: Ex-first minister Mark Drakeford suggests Wales Office should go
datePublished: 2026-10-09T12:04:57.681Z
dateModified: 2026-10-09T12:04:57.681Z
retrieved: 2026-10-09 ~18:10 BST

Former Labour First Minister Mark Drakeford has said it is time to consider scrapping the UK government's Wales Office.

Drakeford said "the time has come" to think about abolishing the department, which was largely stripped of its powers when devolution began in 1999.

Asked on S4C's Y Byd yn ei Le if he would be happy to get rid of the Wales Office, Drakeford said: "Yes, I think the time has come for us to think about that."

But Labour MP Ruth Jones described the suggestion as "foolish", arguing Welsh Secretary Stephen Kinnock was "fighting the corner for Wales".

The future of the Wales Office has been the subject of regular speculation since devolution, with successive UK governments considering whether its functions could be folded into a single department, also covering Scotland and Northern Ireland.

Earlier this year, then-First Minister Eluned Morgan said there remained "a role" for the Welsh secretary, but argued the post should be "the voice of Wales at the cabinet table" rather than "the UK government's voice in Wales".

Under a previous UK Labour government, Peter Hain combined cabinet responsibility for Wales and Northern Ireland between 2005 and 2007.

Asked if he would be happy to get rid of the Wales Office, Drakeford said: "Yes, I think the time has come for us to think about that.

"Of course, [former Labour prime minister] Tony Blair thought of this too.

"This has been part of discussions in Westminster not only now but for more than a decade."

The post of Welsh secretary, or secretary of state for Wales, was created by Harold Wilson's Labour government in October 1964, with the Welsh Office opening the following April.

In 1999 the Welsh Office's powers over areas including health, education, environment, agriculture and transport were taken over by the Welsh Assembly, now known as the Senedd, and what remained of the UK government department was given the title of Wales Office.

Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, Stephen Kinnock was appointed Welsh secretary by Andy Burnham in July

Interviewed on BBC Radio Wales Breakfast on Friday, Ruth Jones dismissed the idea of abolishing it.

"I've got tremendous respect for Mark Drakeford but, let's be honest, he's now retired and, therefore, let the politicians who are elected to get on with the job get on with the job," she said.

"In terms of the Wales Office, the only person from Wales actually at the [UK] cabinet table is the secretary of state for Wales, and he is there fighting the corner for Wales.

"So I would say to disband that would be foolish."

Millions of bedbugs crawl out of mattresses and walls in huge outbreak

'People use AI to avoid paying for school photos, but they don't realise the consequences'

Uni Instagram 'banter' account under fire for 'perpetuation of rape culture'

King pays Andrew's £1.5m repair bill on Royal Lodge

Widdecombe suspect had 'particular hostility to Reform', court told

Autism, ADHD and mental health review: What you need to know

Olivia Colman on viral Wicker memes: 'This has never happened to me before'

Will El Niño and the polar vortex bring snow to the UK this winter?

WeatherWeekly quiz: How long did it take for Glastonbury tickets to sell out?