https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ck3r5qrlp7w5o
HTTP: 200
headline: Drumcree: Michelle O'Neill receives PSNI investigation letter
datePublished: 2026-10-09T09:51:39.353Z
dateModified: 2026-10-09T16:27:40.770Z
retrieved: 2026-10-09 ~18:10 BST

First Minister Michelle O'Neill has said she has received a letter from police investigating protests over the Drumcree parading dispute.

On Thursday, the police said they had begun issuing letters inviting people "reasonably suspected" of committing offences linked to the protests to interview.

Unionist politicians have called for action to be taken against O'Neill and other senior Sinn Féin politicians who took part in the protests against the Orange Order march down the Garvaghy Road at the end of last month.

On Friday, Portadown deputy District Master Alastair Power said there would be "serious consequences" if the Northern Ireland Secretary intervenes to stop the march.

It is the 13th day of deadlock between residents of the mainly nationalist Garvaghy Road and the local district lodge of the Orange Order.

The Parades Commission ruled that the march could go ahead with restrictions in place.

But the parade, from Drumcree Church into Portadown, did not happen due to a large protest on the Garvaghy Road.

O'Neill has previously defended her attendance at the protest, saying she was "proud to stand with the residents" and that "when the law is wrong, I will stand firmly against it".

The police statement did not name anyone they planned to issue a letter to.

In a statement issued by Sinn Féin on Friday afternoon, O'Neill confirmed she had received a letter from the PSNI.

"I can confirm I have received a letter inviting me for a police interview in relation to a peaceful protest on the Garvaghy Road. I will co-operate with the investigation," O'Neill said.

"For the last two weeks, I have stood in solidarity with the Garvaghy Road residents as attempts were made to force an unwanted Orange march through their community," she said.

"I will continue to stand with the Garvaghy Road residents who should be allowed to live in peace and free from sectarian intimidation," she added.

Earlier, Sinn Féin President Mary Lou McDonald said the party would "cooperate" in every way it could but that they remained "comfortable" in standing up for Garvaghy Road residents.

Sinn Féin MLA Deirdre Hargey also told the BBC that she had received a letter and would seek legal advice.

Image source, PA MediaImage caption, Politicians, including Northern Ireland First Minister Michelle O'Neill, blocked the road, preventing Orangemen marching from Drumcree Church to Garvaghy Road on 27 September

When asked by reporters on Friday how he would react if Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Chris Bryant intervenes and stops the Portadown District's parade going ahead, Power said they would "obviously not be very happy".

He said it would be the "first time the secretary of state has intervened on a lawful parade in over 30 years in overturning it".

"We're law abiding citizens and we will have to abide by the law but there will have to be serious consequences from the unionist community on that," he said.

Image source, PA MediaImage caption, The deputy first minister said it was "abolutely right" for the police to issue letters to those involved in the protests

Earlier, Deputy First Minister Emma Little-Pengelly, of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) told reporters she welcomed developments in the PSNI investigation, adding that the letters were "absolutely the right thing".

"It doesn't matter whether you are an ordinary citizen or first minister of the country, you have to be subject equally under the law."

Little-Pengelly also defended her attendance at the business engagement, after the DUP previously said it could not be "business as usual" at Stormont in response to Sinn Féin's involvement in protests on Garvaghy Road.

She said she did not want to punish "the work we need to do in terms of growing our economy and investing in public services... just because of the deeply reckless behaviour of Michelle O'Neill and Sinn Féin".

Speaking to The Nolan Show earlier, DUP leader Gavin Robinson said he expected "to see sanctions" for those investigated by the police.

Image source, PA MediaImage caption, Carla Lockhart, Jamie Bryson and Alistair Power spoke to the media on Friday