https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c6n8dg8kgjgko

BBC: Teen's life changed by gene editing that stopped blood disorder symptoms. By Joanne Writtle, West Midlands health correspondent. JSON-LD datePublished = dateModified = 2026-10-09T05:10:09Z (06:10 BST).
Vian, 16, from Coventry, born with thalassaemia - a condition affecting haemoglobin, which red blood cells use to carry oxygen. It left her short of breath and with no appetite. Her own stem cells were edited and she no longer needs the monthly blood transfusions she endured for most of her life.
Vian: 'My whole life's different now. It's changed so much.' / 'It's much easier for me now. I always have energy to do stuff. I'm like, "mum let's go out". Before, I would just sleep, always tired.' / 'I have more options now. Before, I couldn't do most things other kids could. I usually sat out of PE. I really love PE, but I couldn't do that.'
She has started studying health and social care at college and wants to be a nurse.
Her edited stem cells were returned last December following chemotherapy; she has recovered well.
AVAILABILITY (the reach line): the treatment, for patients with thalassaemia or sickle cell disease, 'is offered to young people at three children's hospitals in the country'. Vian was one of the first to have it.
Dr Sarah Lawson, consultant haematologist, calls it a 'functional cure' - the disease doesn't go away, but the aspects that caused problems are removed. 'We collect the stem cells. They are sent off to a manufacturing laboratory where they are edited... and that changes how those stem cells work and it makes them produce more foetal or baby haemoglobin.' In thalassaemia 'that allows them to be transfusion free', and in sickle cell disease 'it gives them a high baby haemoglobin level, which then negates the problems with the sickle haemoglobin'. And: 'When I was at medical school, which was a long time ago, I remember learning a little bit about gene therapy and it being talked about then. And for it now to be a reality 20-odd years later is incredible.'
SECOND CASE: JoelSamuel, 14, from Oldbury, has sickle cell disease causing excruciating pain and many hospital admissions. His stem cells have recently been collected at Birmingham Children's Hospital; they will be edited and in six months he will have chemotherapy before the edited cells are returned. 'I get tired and then the next day I get sick and I won't be able to go to school.' On the treatment: 'I think it's good to make me better, so I can go and do stuff that takes my energy.'
SINGLE-SOURCED: BBC regional health reporting, no competing coverage found. No named hospital trust statement beyond Dr Lawson; no new trial data or peer-reviewed paper attached - this is a patient-experience piece on an already-approved therapy, not a new scientific finding.
