https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cm2d6x11l6pko

BBC: I would not have voted for Zionism motion, Zack Polanski says. By Becky Morton, political reporter. TIMESTAMP DISCREPANCY: JSON-LD datePublished 2026-10-08T21:00:16Z (22:00 BST Thursday) but dateModified 2026-10-09T08:48:53Z (09:48 BST Friday); on-page byline reads 'Published 8 October 2026 / Updated 1 hour ago'. The Today programme material below is new this morning, so treat the 09:48 BST modification as the real time for the right-to-exist exchange.
THE RIGHT-TO-EXIST EXCHANGE, BBC Radio 4 Today, Friday morning, presenter Nick Robinson. Asked repeatedly whether he believes Israel has a right to exist, Polanski said:
'I don't believe any state has the right to oppress or to commit apartheid and certainly not genocide on another people', adding: 'I don't believe that's a state that anyone should be supporting.'
Pressed by Robinson for a 'yes/no' answer, Polanski said: 'I've repeated many times that I want to see equal rights for Israelis and Palestinians - at the moment Palestinians don't have equal rights so I think I'm answering your question really clearly.'
ON BBC BREAKFAST, asked repeatedly how he would have voted: 'There's parts [of the motion] I disagree with and parts I agree with.' / 'The part I disagree with is the Green Party of England and Wales or indeed even the British government deciding that there should be a single state. I think that's up to the Israelis and the Palestinians.'
Polanski, who is Jewish, added: 'In terms of the actual substantial part of the motion... the displacement and genocide of the Palestinian people is clearly underpinned by a racist ideology. I think that's obvious.'
He said he would have supported amendments 'including to make sure that we weren't determining there was a single democratic state', concluding: 'The motion as amended, I would have voted for. The motion unamended, I wouldn't have voted for.'
He had also wanted the motion amended to specify it should not be used to discipline Jewish members attending synagogues that consider themselves Zionist. BOTH amendments favoured by Polanski were rejected by Green members.
Until Friday morning he had not explicitly said how he would have voted, and had declined media interviews in the final days of the by-election campaign.
Under Green Party rules, member-backed motions become official party policy but are not automatically in the manifesto.
The Jewish Leadership Council and the Board of Deputies of British Jews have condemned the motion, branding it an attack on the Jewish community.
On Lucas's criticism, Polanski told the BBC 'I like and respect Caroline a lot' and 'she's entitled to her opinion', but added: 'The reason why I wasn't at the conference debate is because there was a national by-election.'
