https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/saudi-arabia
HTTP 200 | JSONLD published 2013-02-15T00:00:00+00:00 | modified 2026-10-08T19:35:10+01:00
headline: None

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
Download a more detailed map (PDF, 1.04 MB)
Your travel insurance could be invalidated if you travel against advice from the Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO).
all travel to within 10km of the border with Yemen
all but essential travel to Aseer province, Riyadh province, Najran province, Jizan province and Taif city and Taif International Airport.
Find out more about why FCDO advises against travel.
Since 13 July, the Houthis (a military group in Yemen) have launched missiles and drones targeting several locations in Saudi Arabia. There is a heightened threat against airports, military bases, ports and energy infrastructure across Saudi Arabia, including Abha, Jizan, Najran, Riyadh, Jeddah and Yanbu, as well as shipping in the Red Sea. Further attacks are possible. Follow Saudi Civil Defence alerts.  See ‘Regional risks’ page.
British nationals currently in the Middle East should be prepared for possible flight cancellations, periodic airspace closures, and potential travel disruption, and should:
The US and Iran announced a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on 17 June 2026 in relation to the conflict in the Middle East, however the situation in the Middle East remains unpredictable. Since 8 July there have been strikes and retaliatory attacks by Iran in a number of locations across the region against US military and civilian infrastructure. There is a risk of more attacks and unforeseen escalation in the region. Before the ceasefire, the Iranian regime had stated its intention to target locations associated with the US and Israel, including organisations, businesses, facilities, and institutions.
No travel can be guaranteed safe. Read all the advice in this guide. You may also find it helpful to:
If you choose to travel, research your destinations and get appropriate travel insurance. Insurance should cover your itinerary, planned activities and expenses in an emergency.
The Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO) provides advice about risks of travel to help you make informed decisions. Find out more about FCDO travel advice.
Sign up to get email notifications when this travel advice is updated.
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
        Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab ).