https://www.nbcnews.com/world/europe/nobel-peace-prize-favorites-include-yulia-navalnaya-donald-trump-downp-rcna602462
HTTP 200 | JSONLD published 2026-10-09T08:48:29.880Z | modified 2026-10-09T09:05:43.883Z
headline: Nobel Peace Prize awarded to Navanethem ‘Navi’ Pillay for her efforts to promote international law

Navanethem “Navi” Pillay  in Johannesburg in 2023.Wikus De Wet / AFP via Getty Share Add NBC News to GoogleOct. 9, 2026, 4:48 AM EDT / Updated Oct. 9, 2026, 5:05 AM EDTBy Alexander SmithThe Nobel Peace Prize was awarded Friday to the South African legal pioneer Navanethem “Navi” Pillay for defending international law and institutions from attack in a world where “might overtakes right.”
Pillay, 85, defended Nelson Mandela and stood up against apartheid, sat on international courts for conflicts in Rwanda, Myanmar and the Palestinian territories, and served as United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The award was intended to make a wider point about what the Norwegian Nobel Committee described as a global “shift towards power politics,” which was coming “at the expense of legal frameworks and global respect for law and justice,” Jørgen Watne Frydnes, Chair of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, said.
By contrast, Pillay had “held states and national leaders accountable and brought hope to victims of violence and conflict,”
“Navi Pillay is one of the great defenders of international legal principles in our time,” Frydnes said, adding that the committee had not yet been able to reach her for comment.
“Her distinguished career reminds us of the need to support, fortify and expand the global rule of law,” he said. “Navi Pillay’s commitment to justice and human dignity is a source of hope and inspiration to all who seek to bring about a more peaceful world.”
Pillay was not among the pre-announcement frontrunners, who included Yulia Navalnaya, the widow of anti-Kremlin figure Alexei Navalny, Ugandan climate activist Vanessa Nakate, and Mykola Kuleba, who founded an organization to rescue Ukrainian children abducted and forcibly deported by Russia.
FOR SUBSCRIBERSAfter surviving a botched lethal injection, Christa Pike faces unprecedented legal battleFOR SUBSCRIBERSFood banks overwhelmed by Trump cutsFOR SUBSCRIBERSInflation and tariffs push U.S. holiday spending projections to a record $1.7 trillionFOR SUBSCRIBERSWhat happened inside the room where officials tried to execute Christa Pike by lethal injectionFOR SUBSCRIBERSHow we reported the saga of the CIA officer and his gold-bar stashFOR SUBSCRIBERS‘We’re going to beat you to death with audits’: Brad Raffensperger gears up to oversee his final election in GeorgiaFOR SUBSCRIBERSDiddy is punished following NBC News report on his VIP life in prison and contraband cellphone useFOR SUBSCRIBERS‘Too young to vote, old enough to be tear gassed’: French protesters’ anger swellsFOR SUBSCRIBERSDOJ gets aggressive in suing states that challenge Trump’s immigration policiesFOR SUBSCRIBERSJustice Department seeks criminal charge for former Trump aide Cassidy HutchinsonFOR SUBSCRIBERS‘I just want to hold him’: USS Lincoln sailor to meet his 10-month-old son as ship docksFOR SUBSCRIBERSSenate candidates run on raising Social Security taxes for higher incomes to prevent benefit cutsFOR SUBSCRIBERSRussian operation that used ChatGPT tricked schools, a politician and media, OpenAI saysFOR SUBSCRIBERSTrump administration’s deal with Nevada fuels data center fight in governor’s raceFOR SUBSCRIBERSLatino voters reject Trump’s immigration policies — and detail the personal impactSlide 1 of 1President Donald Trump was among the 287 candidates, according to the leaders of Israel, Pakistan and Cambodia, which said they nominated him. But despite long coveting the award,     Trump said this week he didn’t think he would win.
FOR SUBSCRIBERSAfter surviving a botched lethal injection, Christa Pike faces unprecedented legal battleFOR SUBSCRIBERSFood banks overwhelmed by Trump cutsFOR SUBSCRIBERSInflation and tariffs push U.S. holiday spending projections to a record $1.7 trillionFOR SUBSCRIBERSWhat happened inside the room where officials tried to execute Christa Pike by lethal injectionFOR SUBSCRIBERSHow we reported the saga of the CIA officer and his gold-bar stashFOR SUBSCRIBERS‘We’re going to beat you to death with audits’: Brad Raffensperger gears up to oversee his final election in GeorgiaFOR SUBSCRIBERSDiddy is punished following NBC News report on his VIP life in prison and contraband cellphone useFOR SUBSCRIBERS‘Too young to vote, old enough to be tear gassed’: French protesters’ anger swellsFOR SUBSCRIBERSDOJ gets aggressive in suing states that challenge Trump’s immigration policiesFOR SUBSCRIBERSJustice Department seeks criminal charge for former Trump aide Cassidy HutchinsonFOR SUBSCRIBERS‘I just want to hold him’: USS Lincoln sailor to meet his 10-month-old son as ship docksFOR SUBSCRIBERSSenate candidates run on raising Social Security taxes for higher incomes to prevent benefit cutsFOR SUBSCRIBERSRussian operation that used ChatGPT tricked schools, a politician and media, OpenAI saysFOR SUBSCRIBERSTrump administration’s deal with Nevada fuels data center fight in governor’s raceFOR SUBSCRIBERSLatino voters reject Trump’s immigration policies — and detail the personal impactSlide 1 of 1“I don’t know what their decision is going to be,” Trump said in the Oval Office. “They have a reputation for maybe not giving it to people like me.”
Venezuelan opposition leader Maria Corina Machado gave her 2025 Nobel Peace Prize medal to Trump in January as she sought U.S. support for her efforts in Venezuela.
This is a developing story. Please check back for updates.
Alexander SmithAlexander Smith is a senior reporter for NBC News Digital based in London.