https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmewe5lvl2rqo

BBC: Zack Polanski vows to stay on after calls to resign as Green leader mount. By Ewan Somerville, political reporter. JSON-LD datePublished = dateModified = 2026-10-09T10:11:22Z (11:11 BST). Freshest item in the file.
Vivien Lichtenstein, leader of the Jewish Greens, said on Friday Polanski 'should resign', calling it a 'big mistake' for him to have dodged the conference debate. To Times Radio: 'I don't know which Jewish members of the party he's been working with - it certainly hasn't been with the Jewish Greens committee.'
Polanski told BBC Breakfast he would 'absolutely' stay on as leader and 'of course' had not questioned that. 'Of course I can carry on as leader of the Green Party.' / 'Yes I've taken a loss tonight but our movement is so much bigger than one election or one motion.'
Caroline Lucas (former leader) described the motion as 'dangerous' and 'flawed from top to bottom'. To BBC Newsnight, asked if he should stand down: 'I think let's just see what happens in the coming days and weeks. Obviously he has been completely taken up with this by-election.'
Jonathan Bartley, Green co-leader 2016-2021, called on Polanski to 'put his hands up' and 'say sorry' but did not demand he quit. To BBC Radio 4 World at One: 'I think [the vote] was a failure of leadership from Zack and there is a certain toxicity now from the Green Party.'
Polanski confirmed he would only have voted for the 'imperfect' motion had it been amended. He said the 'substantial part of the motion', that 'the displacement and genocide of the Palestinian people is clearly underpinned by a racist ideology', was 'obvious'.
Motion defined Zionism as an ideology supporting 'an ethnonationalist Jewish state' and backed a 'single democratic Palestinian state in all of historic Palestine', which includes modern-day Israel.
SCALE OF REVOLT: four of the five Green MPs and one of the party's two deputy leaders opposed it; the Green deputy in Wales and some councillors resigned; some local members and the European Green Party have distanced themselves.
PM Andy Burnham has called on Polanski to reverse the 'completely wrong' motion to stop it remaining party policy or reaching the next manifesto.
Bridget Phillipson (Labour chair) to BBC Breakfast: drew comparisons with Labour's own antisemitism scandal, saying the Greens now face a 'serious problem' with antisemitism.
Polanski says anti-Zionism and antisemitism are distinct and nobody will be excluded from the party on the basis of faith, place of worship or religious body.
TIMELINE: the party's next scheduled leadership ballot is summer 2027.
BBC note: several UN reports have accused the Israeli government of war crimes amounting to genocide in Gaza; Israel has repeatedly denied all such allegations.
