https://www.aljazeera.com/amp/news/liveblog/2026/10/9/iran-war-live-iranian-media-reports-massive-explosions-in-hormuz-strait
HTTP 200 | JSONLD published 2026-10-09T00:00:21Z | modified 2026-10-09T10:00:00Z
headline: Iran war live: 3 Saudi citizens killed in attacks on Riyadh airport

Civil Aviation Authority says King Khalid International Airport subjected to two attacks on Thursday.
Trump says he won’t attack Iran before the US midterm elections
Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian says relations between Tehran and Moscow are expanding, according to a report by the Iranian news agency IRNA.
After meeting Russian President Vladimir Putin in Turkmenistan, Pezeshkian noted that trade, economic ties and communication between the two countries are progressing positively.
He added that Iran was determined to expand its relations with Russia in line with the two nations’ joint strategic roadmap and the present time was the most appropriate for Russia and Iran to deepen and expand that cooperation.
South African jurist Navi Pillay, who fought apartheid and called out Israel’s genocide in Gaza, has won the 2026 Nobel Peace Prize.
⁠Pillay was the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNCHR) from 2008 to 2014. It welcomed ⁠⁠the achievement, acknowledging her longstanding advocacy for human rights.
“It is amazing news, ⁠we need more ⁠⁠dedication and commitment to human rights,” ⁠⁠Shabia Mantoo, ⁠⁠spokesperson for ⁠⁠the UNHCR, told reporters ‌‌in Geneva.
In 2021, Pillay led the UN’s open-ended inquiry into “systematic” abuses in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories. In 2024, Pillay told Al Jazeera that her team at the UN Commission of Inquiry submitted 7,000 pieces of evidence to the International Criminal Court related to crimes committed by Israel and Hamas.
“We have never seen anything like this,” she said.
Yemen’s Deputy Minister of Defence has told Al Jazeera “that the region and the international community have come to realise the danger posed by [the Houthis]”.
During an interview on Thursday, Major General Samir Al-Sabri said that as battles with the Houthis intensify, the Yemeni forces’ ultimate goal is “a decisive military victory” that will “restore state institutions, which the Houthis seized and overthrew in 2014”.
He added that the military will continue adhering to the rules of engagement and international humanitarian law.
“Any force or person who commits a violation will be held accountable as an individual responsibility, not a collective one, because the directives are clear and explicit about the need to observe the rules of engagement and adhere to the law,” he said.
Yemen’s deputy minister of defence has told Al Jazeera that the capital Sanaa, which is held by the Houthis, is still a military goal.
“Sanaa remains a direct military target, and what separates government forces from starting the battle towards it is the factor of time and crossing the areas near it,” Major-General Samir Al-Sabri said in an interview on Thursday.
“Controlling the Bab al-Mandeb strait and the western coast is crucial, firstly because of their strategic importance, and also because of their connection to global and regional issues.
“However, attention remains focused on Hodeidah, Sanaa, and Saada,” he added.
Yemen’s Deputy Minister of Defence has told Al Jazeera that despite intense battles with the Houthis, there is “great momentum” within Yemen’s forces.
“We started the battle with great momentum and it continues,” Major General Samir Al-Sabri said in an interview on Thursday.
“Progress has not stopped, but the fronts are uneven in this regard; some are progressing significantly, some are moving slowly, while other fronts have suffered some setbacks and are still being dealt with,” he added.
Colonel Turki al-Maliki, the spokesman for the Saudi-led coalition supporting Yemen’s government, says his forces have destroyed three rocket-launch platforms used by the Houthis “to threaten regional security”.
Al-Maliki added that all Houthi attacks on civilians and civilian facilities “will be met with resolve” by the coalition.
On Thursday, Yemeni government forces said they had “neutralised” 1,860 Houthi fighters since launching a large-scale counteroffensive to retake territory under the control of the Iran-backed group.
Saudi Arabia’s national carrier Saudia said Thursday’s attacks on King Khalid International Airport, north of Riyadh, killed one of its employees.
It said the incident caused damage to one of its aircraft while it was on the ground, with no passengers on board.
Saudia added that its flights and operations at the airport resumed at 6pm local time (15:00 GMT) on Thursday.
Statement from #Saudia pic.twitter.com/2pXOpwIgTs
— Saudia Group | مجموعة السعودية (@SaudiaGroup) October 9, 2026
Several flights to Riyadh’s King Khalid International Airport have been cancelled or diverted after the deadly attack on the airport, but flight disruptions were much more significant on Thursday.
The Saudi Civil Aviation Authority says the airport, located north of Riyadh, was subjected to two attacks on Thursday in which three Saudi citizens were killed and several people injured.
At least 103 flights have been cancelled today, compared with 335 on Thursday.
Major airlines like Air India said they have cancelled flights to and from Riyadh until at least the weekend.
Germany’s Lufthansa said it was suspending flights to the Saudi capital through October 16, according to the Reuters news agency.
One of Israel’s top ultra-Orthodox rabbis, Dov Lando, has become the centre of controversy in Israel after comments emerged in which he denigrated Zionism.
In a recently released video recording, the 96-year-old rabbi is heard saying the ideology of Zionism has caused the Jewish people to suffer “disasters” and Jewish Israelis may have been better off without a state.
The remarks have drawn rebukes from Israeli politicians, weeks before legislative elections, in which the role of the country’s growing ultra-Orthodox community, particularly over military service, is a major issue. The political alignment of ultra-Orthodox parties could also prove crucial to the formation of the next government.
So who is Lando, and why are his comments significant?
Three Saudi citizens were killed in two separate attacks on King Khalid International Airport in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, yesterday, which also injured several others of different nationalities, according to Saudi Arabia’s Civil Aviation Authority.
It said their injuries ranged from minor to serious, and they were immediately taken to hospital.
The first attack hit airport facilities, and the second a Saudi Airlines aircraft, the Saudi air transport authority said.
It added that flight operations at the airport had been suspended, with air traffic expected to return to normal later.
At least 81 United States military aircraft, including fighter jets and drones, have been lost or damaged during Operation Epic Fury, the code name for Washington’s military campaign against Iran launched earlier this year.
The statistic comes in a report released on Monday by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), a nonpartisan government agency that provides budget-related research to the legislature.
It estimated that, as of August 1, the cost of US aircraft losses during the US-Israel war on Iran was between $1.9bn and $3.3bn.
The report this week highlights the growing price tag for the war, which began on February 28. A lasting ceasefire has remained out of reach as the conflict continues into its eighth month.
Israeli air strikes have been reported on the outskirts of the town of Kfar Tebnit in the Nabatieh district of southern Lebanon about 5am (02:00 GMT), according to Lebanon’s National News Agency.
Overnight, Israeli artillery fire was reported in the nature reserve of Wadi al-Salouki and on the outskirts of the towns of Nabatieh al-Fawqa, Kfar Tebnit and Mayfadoun in southern Lebanon, where Israeli attacks have continued despite a US-brokered ceasefire agreed between Israel and Lebanon in June.
A day after the October 7, 2023, attacks on Israel and the beginning of Israel’s genocidal war on Gaza, Hezbollah made the decision to join the war, saying it was doing so in support of the Palestinian people. It is a decision that analysts say has forever shaped Lebanese politics.
Experts said the group underestimated the depth of Israel’s intelligence penetration in the run-up to the war, which later manifested in the bloody September 2024 pager attacks and the assassination of much of Hezbollah’s leadership, including Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah.
“Hezbollah got sucked into a vortex which culminated in the decapitation of their leadership and the invasion of south Lebanon,” Nicholas Blanford, a nonresident senior fellow at the Atlantic Council and author of a book about Hezbollah, told Al Jazeera.
“That dealt Hezbollah a major blow to their popular standing and galvanised the election of Joseph Aoun as president and the formation of a new government that took a much stronger line against [the group].”
As fighting intensifies across Yemen between the government and the Houthis, millions of people are confronting another battle far from the front lines: The deteriorating living and economic conditions in the country.
With salaries for large segments of the workforce either unpaid or irregularly disbursed – and the prices of goods and services rising – Yemen’s economic struggles have been compounded by a divided banking system that has made moving money between different parts of the country increasingly complicated.
From Aden’s struggling shoppers to displaced families in Marib and unpaid public-sector workers in Sanaa, Yemenis are being forced to make difficult choices about what they can afford, and what they must go without.
Oil prices have fallen as Middle East supply concerns eased after US President Donald Trump said he will not attack Iran before US midterm elections next month.
The price of Brent – the major international benchmark for oil prices- fell $1.37, or 1.3 percent, to $102.91 a barrel by 04:50 GMT.
On Thursday, Brent crude had risen to $101.53 a barrel as of 01:16 GMT on persistent worries about supply from the Middle East, amid an ⁠increase in attacks on ⁠shipping in the Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz.
Israeli forces have continued their increasing raids and attacks on Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza.
This morning, they raided Salfit in the central occupied West Bank, storming the homes of several Palestinians and deploying troops across the city, Palestinian news agency Wafa reports.
Israeli settlers set fire to olive trees in the Wadi al-Sha’ir area, located between the town of Salfit and al-Lubban ash-Sharqiya, where a number of settler pogroms take place.
Israeli forces also arrested two former prisoners this morning from the town of Beita, south of Nablus, Wafa added. Sources reported that the forces stormed the town at dawn, raided and searched several homes, and arrested Khaled Barham Daoud and Khaled Hamdan Abu Hamdan.
Yesterday, Israeli forces and settlers killed eight people in Gaza and arrested at least 45 people in the occupied West Bank, while settlers injured at least 26 others, Wafa reports. Settlers attacked olive harvesters and besieged a house in Masafer Yatta, while soldiers demolished a house and issued demolition notices for several agricultural facilities.
This comes amid an escalation in settler pogroms against Palestinian farmers in the occupied West Bank in recent months.
Two days after the announced counteroffensive by the internationally recognised Yemeni government, the operation named Dawn of Yemen has already made significant advances. Its forces recaptured territory from the Houthis, an Iran-backed group, along the Red Sea coast near the Bab al-Mandeb strait.
The Saudi-led coalition backing the government has deployed 100 fighter jets, flying round the clock to help secure the strait. In response, the Houthis have claimed attacks on Saudi territory.
This is the most consequential escalation in the Yemen war since the UN-brokered truce of 2022. For four years, the war was managed as a frozen conflict. Now, both sides are trying to redraw the map.
In the coming days, the success of the offensive will be determined not only by gains along three different fronts, but also by the ability of the forces loyal to the Yemeni government to maintain cohesion and force the Houthis to change their cost-of-conflict calculus.
Let’s bring you up to speed with the latest developments:
The Pentagon has drawn up plans for a three-day campaign of strikes against Iran, targeting its missile and drone arsenal, energy facilities and military command centres, The New York Times reports.
The newspaper quoted unnamed officials in the report, which said Trump had ordered the Defense Department to prepare the plans even though he has repeatedly rejected proposals to resume major combat operations, citing progress in diplomatic talks. Trump said on Thursday that he would not attack Iran before November’s midterm elections.
This month, the US deployed a third aircraft carrier to waters near Iran as Tehran has intensified attacks on shipping.