https://edition.cnn.com/2026/10/09/world/live-news/nobel-peace-prize-2026-winner-intl
HTTP 200 | JSONLD published 2026-10-09T07:13:08.914Z | modified 2026-10-09T10:05:44.856Z
headline: Nobel Peace Prize goes to South African human rights pioneer Navi Pillay

"A commitment to justice and human dignity": South African judge Navi Pillay wins Nobel Peace Prize
                        "A commitment to justice and human dignity": South African judge Navi Pillay wins Nobel Peace Prize
            • The Nobel Peace Prize has gone to human rights pioneer Navi Pillay. The South African was integral to the anti-apartheid movement, served as a judge on the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and recently led the UN commission that concluded Israel committed genocide against Palestinians in Gaza.
• The committee said Pillay “held states and national leaders accountable and brought hope to the victims of violence and conflict.” But they are yet to notify the new Nobel laureate. Chair Jørgen Watne Frydnes said “my message to her would be: if you see a Norwegian number calling, please pick up.”
• US President Donald Trump has repeatedly claimed he deserves the peace prize, saying this week that it “would be a great discredit” to the Nobel committee if it did not select him for the honor.
Navi Pillay poses during a photo session in Johannesburg, South Africa, on January 20, 2023.
            In a CNN op-ed five years ago, Navi Pillay reflected on her life’s work, human rights in South Africa and the state of international law 75 years after the Nuremberg Trials laid its foundations.
“As a law student in 1963, I was intrigued by the Nuremberg cases I pored over in the library; they gave me a framework for understanding apartheid-era crimes, and how the law could tackle state-sponsored violence and inequality,” she wrote.
She wrote about her time as one of the first judges elected to serve on the International Criminal Court, the body established in 2002 to prosecute individuals accused of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
“While the creation of the ICC itself was a remarkable achievement, and it has accomplished some notable successes, our work is still only beginning,” she wrote. “When I look around the world, I see the gap between our aspirations and the experiences of victims worldwide.”
“The path toward implementation of the Nuremberg principles is a symbol of humanity’s aspiration and progress toward justice. We are morally obliged to continue our collective work toward a more just and peaceful future on behalf of next generations.”
Chair of the Norwegian Nobel Committee Jorgen Watne Frydnes speaks at the Norwegian Nobel Institute, in Oslo on Friday.
            Every Nobel Peace Prize carries a powerful message imbued with the prestige of this award.
With this year’s award, the Norwegian Nobel Committee “wants to remind the world that the rule of law, national and international, underpins the system we have set up peace and resolve conflicts non-violently,” said its chair Jørgen Watne Frydnes today.
That system of international law is “under tremendous pressure, and its institutions are under attack,” Frydnes added.
He continued: “History has shown that a world operating without the rule of law is unjust, unwise and inhumane. The judges – those who guard the thin red line between order and chaos – are therefore highly deserving of our praise.”
“But today, as these same judges are sanctioned, and their institutions are under attack, we need people of courage, vision and determination – qualities that Navi Pillay demonstrates in her work on the bench,” Frydnes added.
A short while ago, Jørgen Watne Frydnes, chair of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, announced Navi Pillay as the recipient of the 2026 Nobel Peace Prize. Watch the moment here:
                    Navi Pillay wins the 2026 Nobel Peace Prize
                        Navi Pillay wins the 2026 Nobel Peace Prize
        Who is Navi Pillay, this year's peace prize winner?
    Navi Pillay's early career was defined by her work as an anti-apartheid lawyer in her native South Africa.
        Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images
            Navi Pillay, 85, is a South African anti-apartheid lawyer turned international jurist who has “been instrumental in ensuring that war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide are prosecuted,” the Nobel committee said.
She has served as a judge on the world’s most important courts of international law, including the International Criminal Court, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Court of Justice, as well as serving as the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights between 2008-2014.
Before turning to international law, she was integral to the anti-apartheid movement in South Africa, acting as a defense attorney for anti-apartheid activists and helping to secure rights for those imprisoned on Robben Island.
She was also the first Black woman to serve on the High Court in South Africa and became the first woman to start a law practice in her home province of Natal, in South Africa.
Chair of the Norwegian Nobel Committee Jorgen Watne Frydnes announces Navi Pillay as the Nobel Peace Prize 2026 winner.
            The chair of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, Jørgen Watne Frydnes, said in a news conference that they have not yet been able to reach winner Navi Pillay to notify her of the award.
“I would love to talk to you very soon,” he added.
Norway’s international dialing code is +47, in case any Nobel laureates are wondering.
                    Nobel committee praises Peace Prize winner Pillay's "exceptional courage”
                        Nobel committee praises Peace Prize winner Pillay's "exceptional courage”
            The Norwegian Nobel Committee praised 2026 peace laureate Navi Pillay for her “exceptional courage and integrity” in the legal field and for her “efforts to promote peace and international law.”
In their announcement of the award today, the committee said that Pillay’s “commitment to universal legal principles and her firm moral compass are constants in a long career.”
“Navi Pillay has held states and national leaders accountable and brought hope to the victims of violence and conflict,” he added. “In all the positions she has held, she has stressed the responsibility of individuals and states to comply with the rule of law.”
South African judge Navi Pillay speaks during a press conference in Geneva on June 18, 2025.
        Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images
            The 2026 Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded to Navi Pillay for her efforts to promote peace and international law.
We’re about to find out the winner of this year’s Nobel Peace Prize. The committee have entered the room and will shortly begin their announcement.
Firefighters and medics evacuate an injured person after a strike on a residential building in Kyiv, Ukraine, on September 28.
            The peace prize takes on a different significance in a time when there is so much instability.
Destructive wars continued around the globe last year. Russia’s war in Ukraine shows no signs of ending soon, more than a thousand Palestinians have been killed by Israeli strikes in Gaza even after a fragile ceasefire came into effect last November, civil war in Sudan is still raging, and war in Iran has further destabilized the Middle East.
The peace prize “highlights the urgency of certain causes and certain challenges,” said Karim Haggag, the director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI).
As well as these wars, global military spending rose by almost 3% last year, fueled mostly by ballooning defense budgets in Europe and Asia, SIPRI found in their annual report.
The ICC and ICJ are two institutions that experts have highlighted as potential recipients of the award this year.
The Nobel committee can send different messages depending on who they choose to award. If human rights activists or journalists are recognized, the message could be one of “setting an example of moral courage in the face of very strong political or authoritarian pressure,” Haggag added.
Nobel Prize medals are pictured in 2019.
        Jonathan Nackstrand/AFP/Getty Images
            If there is no “suitable” candidate for the peace prize, the Norwegian Nobel Committee can choose not to award it.
The process for selecting Nobel peace laureates closely follows the will of Alfred Nobel, the Swedish chemist who gave his fortune to establish the prizes. His will says the award will be given to “the person who shall have done the most or the best work for fraternity between nations and the abolition or reduction of standing armies and the formation and spreading of peace congresses.”
The Nobel Foundation’s bylaws say that “if none of the works under consideration is found to be of the importance indicated in the first paragraph, the prize money shall be reserved until the following year.”
In the past, the committee has chosen to abstain 19 times – most notably during the first and second world wars – but the peace prize has been awarded every year since 1971.
Some observers have argued that withholding the prize could send a strong message that the world must step up its peacebuilding efforts. But scholars of conflict and disarmament have previously told CNN that withholding the prize could send a message of resignation and hopelessness.
Palestinians carry the body of Al Jazeera correspondent Anas al-Sharif, killed in an Israeli airstrike, during his funeral outside Gaza City's Shifa hospital on August 11, 2025.
            Another potential laureate featured on the list released by the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO) is the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ), a US-based watchdog organization that promotes press freedom by defending the right of media workers to report safely and without fear of reprisal. It also advocates for the release of detained and imprisoned journalists.
CPJ also tracks the killing, detention and targeting of journalists worldwide. The organization said there were a record-high number of journalists killed in 2024 and 2025.
As of December 2025, CPJ researchers have documented 335 journalists worldwide who are imprisoned and 85 who are missing. The watchdog also found that 130 journalists and media workers were killed last year.
“Beyond active warzones, journalists face lethal risks from organized crime and systematic repression,” the PRIO said in a statement. “From targeted killings in armed conflicts and by criminal networks, to the relentless harassment and suppression of independent media in countries such as Russia, Mexico, Myanmar and Afghanistan, reporting truth has increasingly become a matter of life and death.”
Sudanese families fleeing RSF territory wait for food at an Emergency Response Room communal kitchen in Bir Hamada, in Khartoum state, Sudan, on March 17, 2025.
            More than three years after it broke out, Sudan’s deadly civil war is still raging, fueling one of the world’s worst humanitarian crises.
More than 150,000 people have been killed, 14 million more displaced and 33.7 million people – more than two-thirds of Sudan’s population – require urgent humanitarian assistance, the Red Cross reported in July.
But international aid organizations have struggled to reach those in need. In their absence, the community-led Emergency Response Rooms have stepped in, providing food, clean water, medication, community kitchens, health clinics and trauma counseling.
The network of community-led initiatives is listed as a possible laureate by the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO), which publishes a list of five worthy potential winners each year.
“In light of Ukraine and Iran and all of these big geopolitical wars, the Sudan war can end up a little on the back bench, but it is a war that entangles in it a lot of the dynamics in the Middle East with the rising conflict over the Red Sea,” says Haakon Gjerløw, acting director of the PRIO.
Alsanosi Adam, a volunteer and one of the Emergency Response Rooms’ spokespeople, told the Guardian last year: “You risk anything from intimidation to death. From torture to being killed – and everything in between.”
The network emerged from the Sudanese tradition of “Nafeer,” meaning a “collective call to action,” and first developed during earlier upheaval in 2018 and the Covid-19 pandemic, according to aid group Save the Children.
International Court of Justice (ICJ) President Yuji Iwasawa, center, delivers a speech during a celebratory session marking the 80th anniversary of the ICJ in The Hague, Netherlands, on April 17.
            The International Criminal Court (ICC) and International Court of Justice (ICJ) are the two main courts of global law, and frequently appear on the shortlist of potential Nobel Peace Prize winners listed by the Peace Research Institute Oslo.
They have received unprecedented international attention for their efforts to prosecute alleged war crimes committed in Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and Israel’s war in Gaza.
The ICJ, which prosecutes states, has ordered Israel to “take all measures” to prevent genocide in Gaza after South Africa accused Israel of violating international laws on genocide in its war in the territory.
The ICC, which prosecutes individuals, issued an arrest warrant in March 2023 for Russian President Vladimir Putin and another Russian official for an alleged scheme to deport Ukrainian children. It issued arrest warrants for Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his former defense minister, Yoav Gallant, in 2024.
The International Criminal Court, in The Hague, Netherlands, on September 22, 2025.
            But picking the ICC could invoke the wrath of the Trump administration, which targeted several ICC prosecutors with sanctions after it issued the warrants for Israeli officials, as part of its campaign to “dismantle” the court — an effort condemned by Europe and Japan. Neither the US nor Israel are party to the ICC.
“We do feel pressure but as I’ve said the dedication of our staff is extraordinary and they continue to do their work.”
The International Space Station is seen from the Space Shuttle Discovery after undocking from the station on December 19, 2006.
            For the last 26 years, the International Space Station (ISS) has been continuously occupied by humans orbiting the Earth, becoming an increasingly rare example of international cooperation.
“Giving the prize to the ISS would be one way of celebrating what we can achieve as humanity when we are able to cooperate,” said Haakon Gjerløw, acting director of the Peace Research Institute Oslo, which compiles a widely respected shortlist of potential Nobel Peace Prize nominees.
Cooperation on the ISS is enabled through the 1967 Outer Space Treaty, which also prohibited countries from placing nuclear weapons or installing military bases in outer space, Gjerløw points out.
But that treaty does not prohibit the use of conventional weapons in space, and the US military recently confirmed it had deployed weapons in orbit.
So, highlighting the ISS “could also give an impetus for politicians internationally to improve on the Outer Space Treaty,” or establish a new space station that also includes China when the current one is decommissioned in 2030, Gjerløw told CNN.
Jointly run by NASA and its equivalent agencies in Russia, Japan, Canada and Europe, the ISS represents “the most politically complex space exploration program ever undertaken,” according to NASA’s website.
Research there has advanced our understanding in many areas of science, including drug development, quantum mechanics and black holes.
Children separated from their parents from the flash floods study at a temporary learning centre run by the Save the Children charity in Nepal's Nuwakot district on September 11.
        Prakash Mathema/AFP/Getty Images
            Predicting the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize is notoriously difficult, with the nominees only made public 50 years after it’s awarded. But every year, the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO) compiles a widely respected shortlist of potential candidates.
The humanitarian organization Save the Children and Mykola Kuleba, who founded Save Ukraine to advocate for children affected by war in the eastern European country, are on the PRIO’s director’s list this year.
Save the Children works in conflict zones – notably in Gaza, Sudan, Ukraine, Myanmar and the DRC – to provide humanitarian support and help children continue their education.
Mykola Kuleba, head of Safe Ukraine, speaks during an interview in Kyiv, Ukraine, on October 13, 2023.
            Save Ukraine, meanwhile, works to rescue abducted children in Russia and Russian-occupied territories.
“We don’t work with the Russian authorities or any officials in occupied territories, because it’s really dangerous.
In 2024, about 19% of the world’s children lived in a conflict zone, double the proportion from 30 years ago, according to figures from the UN children’s agency (UNICEF).
CNN’s Ivana Kottasová contributed reporting.
Venezuelan opposition leader Maria Corina Machado embraces a child at a protest ahead of the Friday inauguration of President Nicolas Maduro for his third term, in Caracas, Venezuela, in January 2025.
            Venezuelan opposition leader Maria Corina Machado was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize last year after being forced into hiding following a disputed 2024 election in her country.
Machado won the prize for her “struggle to achieve a just and peaceful transition from dictatorship to democracy,” the Nobel committee said.
Her recognition came at an extremely volatile time for Venezuela as the Trump administration intensified its pressure campaign against the country, which culminated in US special forces raiding the capital Caracas and capturing then-President Nicolás Maduro in January.
Machado sought to use the Nobel prize, which US President Donald Trump has publicly coveted, to ally herself with him. She dedicated her award to him in October last year, telling CNN’s Christiane Amanpour that it was “absolutely fair, and that’s what the Venezuelan people feel.”
After US forces toppled Maduro, Machado even traveled to the White House and presented Trump with her medal. The Nobel committee has said the award is not transferable.
However, Machado has been largely sidelined from any role in a post-Maduro government. The Trump administration has instead dealt with acting President Delcy Rodríguez, who previously served as Maduro’s oil minister and vice president. And Machado has been unable to re-enter Venezuela after traveling to Norway in December to collect her medal.
The Director of the Nobel Institute Kristian Berg Harpviken is pictured before the announcement of the 2026 Nobel Peace Prize at the Nobel Institute in Oslo, Norway, on Friday.
        Javad Parsa/NTB/AFP/Getty Images
            Deciding who will be the recipient of a Nobel Prize is a secretive process. This year, the Norwegian Nobel Committee has selected its peace prize laureates from a pool of nominees, comprising 208 individuals and 79 organizations.
The committee will “always revert to the will of Alfred Nobel,” which contains the three criteria of “promoting peace, disarmament and international cooperation,” according to Haakon Gjerløw, acting director of the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO).
“There are different topics… but it always needs to connect them back to the testament of Nobel,” he said.
US President Donald Trump attends a campaign rally at Freeman Coliseum in San Antonio, Texas, on Wednesday.
            US President Donald Trump has expressed his desire to win a Nobel Peace Prize at almost every opportunity — including in the Oval Office this week.
Trump said not awarding him the prize “would be a great discredit” to the selecting committee. The president again said he’d “settled eight wars” while in office, a claim CNN’s Fact Check team describes as an exaggeration.
But experts say it is unlikely he will win. “It’s very difficult to see how the ideals of the Nobel Peace Prize committee would align with the actual policies and positions adopted by the president,” said Karim Haggag, the director of th