https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cqd09g4l2k9yo

BBC: 'Add me on WhatsApp' scam calls to be investigated. By Tom Moseley, You and Yours. JSON-LD datePublished = dateModified = 2026-10-08T23:05:09Z; on-page byline 'Published 9 October 2026, 00:05 BST'. Inside the window.
The Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) is investigating a spike in complaints about 'robo calls' where a recorded voice asks you to add them on WhatsApp, suspected to lead to a recruitment scam.
HARD FIGURES: the ICO had more than 3,600 complaints about automated calls in September - a five-year high and nearly three times the number it had in July. It suspects millions of people are getting these calls and told BBC Radio 4's You and Yours it was 'deeply concerned' by the sharp rise.
ICO ADVICE (the practical household line): ignore calls from numbers you don't recognise; block and report suspicious calls to the watchdog.
The calls typically come from what appears to be a UK mobile number; some recorded messages mention an offer of part-time work.
Simon Fell, of the Communications Crime Strategy Group (telecoms industry body set up to tackle fraud): 'Mostly likely it would be a recruitment scam.' And: 'They would either put you through to a fake job listing, which might involve some form of money muling. It could look like a completely legitimate job, or something ad hoc, but they might pass criminal funds through your account which can lead to terrible consequences.' And: 'It could also be a simple phishing exercise - criminals send out these messages, and what they really want to know is who's picking up, who's active - that information can be resold on the dark web.' And: 'At the end of the day this is a criminal that has reached out to you and they're trying to defraud you in some way shape or form.'
Andy Curry of the ICO is quoted further in the piece under a 'Tip of the iceberg' subheading.
You and Yours added one of the numbers on WhatsApp and received a message (shown in the article).
