https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2026/oct/09/2026-nobel-peace-prize-winner-russia-ukraine-sudan-war-france-protests-poland-latest-news-updates
HTTP 200 | JSONLD published 2026-10-09T10:06:06.000Z | modified 2026-10-09T10:06:06.000Z
headline: Navi Pillay named winner of 2026 Nobel peace prize for efforts to promote international law - live

The Nobel committee chair says the winner was ‘instrumental in ensuring war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide are prosecuted’
Navi Pillay, former chair of the independent international commission of inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory Photograph: Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images View image in fullscreen Navi Pillay, former chair of the independent international commission of inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory Photograph: Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images  From 1h ago10.04 BSTPillay 'instrumental in ensuring war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide are prosecuted,' Nobel committee chair saysPresenting the winner, Jørgen Watne Frydnes says:
“The Nobel Peace Prize for 2026 goes to a person who, with exceptional courage and integrity, has led the way towards a more comprehensive global legal order. This year’s laureate has been instrumental in ensuring that war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide are prosecuted.
The Norwegian Nobel Committee has decided to award the Nobel Peace Prize for 2026 to Navanethem “Navi“ Pillay for her efforts to promote peace and international law.
Navi Pillay’s commitment to universal legal principles and her firm moral compass are constants in a long career. Born into a family of Indian Tamil origin under apartheid in Durban, South Africa, Pillay became a lawyer and legal pioneer, confronting deep structural discrimination, segregation and exclusion.
A common thread runs from her early work defending Nelson Mandela and others who stood up against apartheid to her service as a judge in some of the key international court cases of our time.”
Edwin Cameron, a retired South African constitutional court justice, who is also known for his activism for LGBTQ+ rights and people living with HIV/Aids:
“The award is richly earned and lavishly justified.
It comes at a painful time in our national life. As elsewhere, we have been wrecked by anguish about cross-border migration. This has led to hate-filled anti-migrant xenophobic movements distributing toxic untruths about cross-border migration. The result is that families, mothers, babies, traders, workers, have been terrorised, and many forced to flee.
The award of the Prize to Navi Pillay re-emphasises that the Prize embodies an international aspiration to peace, and to respect and understanding across borders – and that leaders of great stature in our country (Tutu, Mandela, now Pillay) are recognised outside it, on the international stage.
This may help reset our national debate on South Africa’s position in the region, and in Africa.”
Looking visibly amused by the decision in the video, Pillay repeatedly asks if that’s even true, as she says someone called her up and she thought it was a joke.
(She gets reassured that it’s on the BBC, so it must be true.)
“Your applause means victory, really. You don’t want to receive an award, prize or anything unless the public agrees that you deserve this. So that. That’s how I appreciate your applause today.”
“But being a lawyer and a judge I still want to verify,” she laughs.
She says it is “very appropriate” that she is with her “good friends, all of whom support human rights,” as she references her last big thing, the delivery of the UN inquiry report on Gaza, which called it an ongoing genocide.
“One of the main reactions to that … was paying tribute to me for my courage.
And you can imagine how surprised I was. Why would you need courage to speak the truth? You interpret the law, you look at all the facts, so it’s an impartial decision making.”
“So right now, I’m still involved as head judge in the case brought by the Gambia against Myanmar. So everybody says when you going to stop, when are you going to stop? I just turned 85 just last month. I can’t obviously stop my work in support of the Nuremberg Principles, because of the people we meet here.”
She ends laughing: “You know, I hope this is not a joke!”
In a hilarious video posted by Amnesty International’s secretary general Agnes Callamar and showing the moment Pillay found out about the award, her associates applaud her as she walks into the room in disbelief, before joking:
If you clap a little bit more I may share this prize with Trump.
European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen said “few have devoted their lives to justice, peace, and human dignity” like Navi Pillay, as she congratulated her on the win.
“Congratulations to lawyer and human rights activist Navanethem “Navi” Pillay on her Nobel Peace Prize.
Few have devoted their lives to justice, peace and human dignity like she did.
From the violence of apartheid in South Africa to the horrors of the Rwandan genocide, she has confronted some of humanity’s darkest chapters.
She has looked the brutality of injustice in the eye and never looked away. She is the defender of the persecuted, the vulnerable, the voiceless and the excluded. Of the rule of law over the right of might.
In a world that needs justice more than ever, her courage and moral clarity are a precious compass.”
The ⁠United Nations human rights office welcomed the news ⁠of Navi Pillay’s ⁠Nobel Peace ​Prize win, acknowledging her longstanding advocacy for human rights, as reported by Reuters.
“It is ⁠amazing news, we need more dedication and commitment to human rights,” Shabia ⁠Mantoo, spokesperson for the UN human rights ​office, told reporters ‌in Geneva.
“We hope it will encourage and continue ​to ​encourage and inspire others ​to speak out in protection ​and promotion ‌of the human ​rights ​of all people around the world,” Mantoo said in reaction to Pillay’s win.
And that ends the presentation.
Anyone’s got Pillay’s phone number? Asking for a Norwegian friend.
Jørgen Watne Frydnes gets repeatedly asked why the award was given to a person, and not an international court or other broader body.
He repeatedly says Pilay has been “at the forefront of the development of international law for decades, up until this day,” and is the right recipient.
“This is a message that international law and its institutions are the cornerstone of a more peaceful world. So of course, we hope that this prize also will strengthen the institutions, the individuals, not only Navi Pillay, but particularly her.”
He says she is “one of the most courageous and important legal experts of our time.”
He gets pushed on whether the award sends a message to those who question or sanction international courts, including the International Court of Justice.
It’s may sound innocent, but it’s a very specific question as the international court of justice has faced direct pressure and sanction threats from the US, among others.
Jørgen Watne Frydnes doesn’t miss a beat when he answers:
“This is definitely a message to those who are attacking, undermin[ing] the international system, the international rules-based system and the institutions.
Nobel committee’s Jørgen Watne Frydnes now answers some questions.
Amazingly, he says the committee has not been able to reach Pillay.
“If you see a Norwegian number calling, please pick up. I would love to talk to you very soon.”
And that’s the 2026 Nobel Peace Prize winner, Navi Pillay:
View image in fullscreen Chair of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel, South African judge Navi Pillay, gestures after a press conference in Geneva last year. Photograph: Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images 1h ago10.11 BSTNobel committee's decision backing for system of international law 'under tremendous pressure'Explaining the decision, Nobel committee’s Jørgen Watne Frydnes says “the system of international law is under tremendous pressure, and its institutions are under attack.”
“We see a shift towards power politics at the expense of legal frameworks and global respects for law and justice. Whenever might overtakes right, it undermines stability, trust and peaceful coexistence.
In awarding this year’s Nobel Peace Prize, the Norwegian Nobel Committee wants to remind the world that the rule of law, national and international, underpins the system we have set up to ensure peace and resolve conflicts non-violently.
History has shown that a world operating without the rule of law is unjust, unwise and inhumane. The judges, those who guard the thin red line between order and chaos, are therefore highly deserving of our praise.
But today, as these same judges are sanctioned and their institutions are under attack, we need people of courage, vision and determination – qualities that Navi Pillay demonstrates in her work on the bench.
“Navi Pillay has held states and national leaders accountable and brought hope to the victims of violence and conflict.
In all the positions she has held, she has stressed the responsibility of individuals and states to comply with the rule of law. She has also helped define the relevant norms and legal principles when the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda established that rape and sexual violence could constitute a crime against humanity as well as genocide.
Her influence was a significant factor. In the same case, Miss Pillay was instrumental in a separate legal breakthrough. For the first time, a defendant faced charges of incitement to commit genocide purely on the basis of spreading propaganda.”
“The Nobel Peace Prize for 2026 springs directly from Alfred Nobel’s will. Navi Pillay strengthens fraternity between nations and by systematically advancing the use of tribunals for peace and justice, she provides substance, direction and motivation for peace conferences in their modern form.
Navi Pillay is one of the great defenders of international legal principles in our time.
Her distinguished career reminds us of the need to support, fortify and expand the global rule of law. Navi Pillay’s commitment to justice and human dignity is a source of hope and inspiration to all those who seek to bring about a more peaceful world.”
“This year’s laureate has significantly enlarged the scope and impact of international law.
She has served as a judge on the High Court in South Africa, the International Criminal Tribunal of Rwanda and the International Criminal Court. She was the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and until recently she chaired the UN Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
Today, Navi Pillay is a judge on the International Court of Justice in the case where Myanmar stands accused of genocide.
In historic international court cases, she has shown that legal measures can help prevent acts of war and violence.
Navi Pillay has also contributed to strengthen the institutions of international law. Her independence, her expertise and steadfastness have made her one of the most respected international jurists of our time.”
Presenting the winner, Jørgen Watne Frydnes says:
“The Nobel Peace Prize for 2026 goes to a person who, with exceptional courage and integrity, has led the way towards a more comprehensive global legal order. This year’s laureate has been instrumental in ensuring that war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide are prosecuted.
The Norwegian Nobel Committee has decided to award the Nobel Peace Prize for 2026 to Navanethem “Navi“ Pillay for her efforts to promote peace and international law.
Navi Pillay’s commitment to universal legal principles and her firm moral compass are constants in a long career. Born into a family of Indian Tamil origin under apartheid in Durban, South Africa, Pillay became a lawyer and legal pioneer, confronting deep structural discrimination, segregation and exclusion.
A common thread runs from her early work defending Nelson Mandela and others who stood up against apartheid to her service as a judge in some of the key international court cases of our time.”
And it looks like it won’t be any of the obvious favourites.