URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/9/22/trump-gcc-summit-in-new-york-what-does-each-side-want
Al Jazeera — Nils Adler — explainer published 2026-09-22T11:33 (12:33 BST Tue 22 Sep) — PRE-MEETING PREVIEW; use for background/GCC composition only

Trump-GCC Summit in New York: What does each side want?
Leaders of the six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states are set to meet United States President Donald Trump in New York on Tuesday, as the US-Israel war on Iran nears seven months.
Since the war began on February 28, Iran has repeatedly struck US bases across the Middle East as well as airports, energy facilities and hotels. The war has particularly hit the Gulf nations hard, as their oil and gas exports – the mainstay of their economies – have been disrupted, causing a global energy crisis.
A June memorandum of understanding (MoU) briefly raised hopes of an end to the war, but it collapsed last month amid disputes over navigation through the Strait of Hormuz, which remains effectively closed.
Trump is set to meet the leaders from Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, which form the GCC, on the sidelines of the UNGA.
Trump told US media outlet Axios on Thursday that he wanted to meet the GCC leaders as he faced a "big decision" on the war and wanted to speak with them directly.
Experts say there are two interconnected issues – the US-Israel war on Iran and the conflict between Houthi rebels and the Saudi-backed government forces in Yemen.
The UAE has been able to keep exporting oil by pipeline to its port of Fujairah, which bypasses the Strait of Hormuz, although not at the volumes it would like. Qatar, whose gas exports depend on the strait, has seen its LNG shipments severely curtailed. Saudi Arabia is now under "enormous pressure" as the Houthis gain ground in Yemen, and has been "intensifying their lobbying" for US strikes on the group (Ahmed Helal, The Asia Group).
Speaking at an event in New York on Sunday, Qatar's Prime Minister Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al Thani described the economic fallout from the US-Israel war on Iran as an "earthquake".
