URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cq07ly8xzvn4o
BBC News — published 22 Sep 2026 15:58 UTC (16:58 BST)

Two suspects were detained in Manchester city centre on Sunday, police said

22 September 2026

Two men have been arrested over a suspected terrorist plot to target the Jewish community in Manchester, police have said.

The men, both in their 30s, were arrested on Sunday on the eve of Yom Kippur - considered to be the holiest day in the Jewish calendar - when thousands of British Jews were in synagogues already guarded with a heavy security and police presence.

The men were detained on suspicion of offences under Section 41 of the Terrorism Act 2000, according to the Metropolitan Police, which is leading the investigation.

Sources have told the BBC the suspected plot was "fairly imminent" and in the later stages of planning.

Home Secretary Shabana Mahmood said the government would "continue to do all in our power to address threats against our Jewish community".

She added: "We cannot expect our Jewish community to live behind higher walls.

"We must also tackle antisemitism at its source and root it out wherever it rears its head."

'Remain viligant'

Deputy Assistant Commissioner Vicki Evans said police were aware the news would cause "further concern" to the Jewish community "especially given the significant High Holy day period".

The two suspects remain in police custody after being taken to a London police station for questioning.

Police said the investigation related to a "suspected terrorist plot to target the Jewish community in the Manchester area".

"This has been a long-running proactive investigation which has led to the disruption of what we believe to be a plot to target the Jewish community in the Manchester area," said Evans.

"Counter-terrorism policing (CTP) continue to focus our efforts on identifying and disrupting those who wish to cause harm in our communities.

"Importantly, we do not believe there to be any ongoing threat to the public in relation to this matter, but as ever, we would ask that people remain vigilant and contact police with any concerns."

Police went to a block of flats on Epworth Street in Liverpool following Sunday's arrests

The two suspects were arrested on Newton Street in the Northern Quarter area of Manchester at 14:45 BST.

Detectives have obtained warrants of further detention for both men, meaning they can remain in police custody until 27 September.

Police confirmed searches at properties on Epworth Street in Liverpool and Lancaster Road in Salford had now been completed.

Evans, who is the senior national co-ordinator for CTP, said: "We are acutely aware this news will cause further concern to the Jewish community, as well as the wider public, especially given the significant High Holy day period.

"I want to reassure them we are working incredibly closely with colleagues in Greater Manchester Police and partners to ensure we're doing everything we can to keep them and the wider public safe.

"And more broadly across the country, CTP is working with local police forces to provide protective security support and advice for areas with Jewish communities, and particularly during the High Holy Day period."

Police have arrested two men, both in their 30s

A spokesperson for the Community Security Trust, which coordinates security for Jewish communities in the UK, said the suspected plot was "utterly chilling coming so close to the anniversary of the terrorist attack at Heaton Park Synagogue last year".

They added: "[This] is another reminder of the serious terrorist threat facing Jewish communities in this current time."

Get in touch

Tell us which stories we should cover in Greater Manchester

Listen to the best of BBC Radio Manchester on Sounds and follow BBC Manchester on Facebook, external, X, external, and Instagram, external. You can also send story ideas via Whatsapp to 0808 100 2230.

Related topics

Manchester
