URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cqd08mn9x52po
BBC News — published 22 Sep 2026 18:41 UTC (19:41 BST)

Kieran Kyle said Kemi Badeonch would get "a bullet in her head" if she went to Belfast

22 September 2026

A man has pleaded guilty to sending the Conservative leader Kemi Badenoch emails threatening to shoot her dead.

Kieran Kyle sent three emails on 2 May to the Tory party leader in which he made racist references and claimed to have been in the IRA, a court has heard.

On Tuesday, the 43-year-old pleaded guilty at Westminster Magistrates' Court to two counts of sending communications of an indecent or offensive nature.

The messages came on the same day Badenoch apologised for footage of Bloody Sunday being used in a social media clip to criticise a bill on historical issues in Northern Ireland.

Thirteen unarmed civilians were shot dead when members of the Army's parachute regiment opened fire on civil rights demonstrators in the Bogside area of Londonderry on 30 January 1972, which became known as Bloody Sunday.

Jennifer Dannhauser, prosecuting, said Kyle had written: "I'm ex-IRA, so Bloody Sunday references from you are going to give you trouble."

He said he would have shot Badenoch when he was a paramilitary, the court was told.

It heard Kyle, of Gillingham, Kent, had emailed Badenoch's husband Hamish on 29 April and used a racist term.

In the message, he said she had a "big mouth" and he should "put a leash on her".

The defendant wrote again days later, the court was told, using a racist term and saying "misusing Bloody Sunday is a new low, pray she never ends up in Belfast cos she'll be left face down in a ditch with a bullet in her head".

The Tory leader was said to have been left upset and distressed by the messages

Dannhauser said the couple were left distressed and upset, particularly by the "racist language and threats of violence".

The video criticising the Northern Ireland Troubles Bill was posted to Badenoch's social media channels on 28 April.

In it, Badenoch said the Labour bill would "drag" Troubles veterans back to court.

Kyle, who the court heard is of previous good character, is due to be sentenced on October 29.

Chief magistrate Paul Goldspring told him a custodial sentence was "a real option".

Additional reporting by PA Media.

Follow BBC Kent on Facebook, external, on X, external, and on Instagram, external. Send your story ideas to southeasttoday@bbc.co.uk, external or WhatsApp us on 08081 002250.

Related topics

Kemi Badenoch

Gillingham

Related links

HM Courts Service
