URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cq2dwye3r7k4o
BBC News — published 22 Sep 2026 20:55 UTC (21:55 BST)

Trump says he can do business with Burnham but criticises 'terrible' Chagos deal

10 hours ago

US President Donald Trump has said Andy Burnham is a man he can do business with, after the two leaders met in person for the first time.

Trump said UK-US relations are "more up now" that Burnham is in power, following their meeting on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly in New York.

Speaking to reporters, Burnham said he had "established a good connection" with Trump and they had "taken that further today" following discussions on issues such as trade and immigration.

But the US president made clear his opposition to the UK's "terrible" deal to hand over the Chagos Islands to Mauritius and pay to lease back a joint UK-US military base on the archipelago's largest island, Diego Garcia.

Burnham, asked by broadcasters if the deal is "dead", later said the UK will "work hard" to find a resolution between the different sides and he is "confident we can find it working with our US partners".

Trump and Burnham met on Tuesday as they attended the United Nations for the annual gathering of world leaders.

Following bilateral talks, Burnham sat alongside Trump and used his opening remarks to say: "You and I have established a good connection in our early discussions and we've taken that further today."

The two men then faced questions shouted from the assembled press pack.

Asked by the BBC if Burnham was a man he could do business with, Trump said: "Yeah I do, I think he's a natural businessperson, we've had a lot of discussions even before this meeting we've spoken to each other numerous times on the phone.

"Yeah, I think so, he gets it, he understands what he has to do."

Burnham later said he had explained to Trump that Britain has been in "too much turbulence" in recent times but it is time to "turn the story" about the country into a positive one.

The US president added that the UK is a country with "great patriotism", and he thinks it is "waiting for good leadership, waiting for success".

Relations between Sir Keir and Trump also began well before becoming increasingly strained earlier this year when the then-prime minister refused to permit the use of UK bases for the initial US-Israel strikes on Iran.

Chagos deal criticism

Trump reiterated his criticism of the Chagos Islands deal and stressed how a joint UK-US military base on Diego Garcia is "strategically very important", particularly in relation to US operations in Iran.

The agreement would see the UK cede sovereignty of the territory to Mauritius and pay an average of £101m ($136m) per year to lease back the military base - but in April the deal was paused indefinitely because Trump pulled his support.

Speaking on Tuesday, Trump said: "I think the prime minister is going to be looking at [the deal]."

Burnham replied: "Yep."

He later told broadcasters he has "inherited the situation and we need a resolution".

Burnham added: "It's critical to safeguard the future of the base, and that matters to us for security reasons, but also clearly to the United States as well.

"What I said in the meeting is that we will work to find that resolution between the different sides, and we'll work hard to find it."

The prime minister had spoken to his Mauritian counterpart, Navin Ramgoolam, ahead of his trip to New York.

Reform UK leader Nigel Farage, who has long been a critic of the deal, posted on X: "The Chagos deal is dead. Thank God."

Burnham also referenced that his private discussions with Trump included the Falkland Islands, which have been the subject of comments by the US president and Argentina's president Javier Milei.

The Falklands, in the south-west Atlantic Ocean, remain the subject of a sovereignty dispute between Britain and Argentina, more than 40 years on from an armed conflict over the territory.

Earlier this month, Trump hinted he would not come to the UK's aid in a potential future conflict with Argentina over the British overseas territory.

He had previously said the US could revise its neutral position on the islands' sovereignty if the UK failed to increase defence spending.

Milei heightened tensions with the UK after he warned he would impose economic sanctions on firms which exploit oil close to the Falklands.

During a national address in early September, Milei also said: "The Falklands are our future, we need to recover these islands which are nationally relevant. There is no other path forward".

Burnham told broadcasters: "We will stand firm in the face of any threats, we will defend the right of the Falkland Islanders to self-determination and to remain British.

"And I just wanted the [US] president to know directly from me, that's the clear British position, and he very much understood what I was saying."

One of the areas Burnham has been keen to focus on during his trip to the UN is artificial intelligence (AI).

The prime minister met business leaders, including Apple's executive chairman Tim Cook, on Tuesday.

He told them he wants a "single set of global principles and standards that are very much about unlocking the full potential whilst guarding against the risks".

Burnham's approach could cause friction with Trump, with the president using his address to the UN General Assembly to say that the US "totally rejects any attempt to construct a globalist scheme" to control AI.

Trump dubbed AI as "super intelligence" and said the US will "encourage it, not rein it in".

Burnham later met European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, with the PM apologising for arriving around 10 minutes late due to his bilateral with Trump running over.

Von der Leyen reassured the PM, saying: "These things are understandable."

Sign up for our Politics Essential newsletter to keep up with the inner workings of Westminster and beyond.

Burnham says he's not embarrassed about hoax message exchange

A quick guide to Donald Trump
