URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c6wyzkge3w9no
OUTLET/TIME: title=Mum and three children die in Bootle house fire - BBC News | datePublished=2026-09-22T13:42:07.417Z | dateModified=2026-09-22T17:02:59.288Z

Mum and three children die in Bootle house fire - BBC News

ByLauren Hirst and Jonny Humphries, North West

Published

22 September 2026

A mother and three children have died in a house fire on Merseyside.
Six fire engines were at the scene at the height of the blaze at the semi-detached property in Stone Square in Bootle, Sefton, at 03:45 BST.
Eight firefighters searched the house where they discovered four people in an upstairs bedroom who were showing no signs of life, Merseyside Fire and Rescue Service said. 
Another casualty, who was outside the property when crews arrived, was taken to hospital.
Officers from Merseyside Police were at the scene and a joint investigation with the fire service into the cause of the blaze is under way. 
The North West Ambulance Service's hazardous area response team also attended the scene of the fire and confirmed the four fatalities.
Chief Fire Officer Nick Searle confirmed the "intense fire [had] spread very rapidly".

The street was cordoned off by police and, earlier, fire officers could be seen knocking on neighbours' doors.
One said: "I heard shouting in the early hours but I just thought someone was having an argument, then I came downstairs and saw all the fire engines."
Another local resident, who did not want to be named, said: "We all came out on the front and we could see smoke coming over from the houses.
"The sirens woke me up and there were fire engines in the street."
The fire service said the main blaze had been extinguished with crews damping down the area.

Kevin Longshaw, area manager for Merseyside Fire and Rescue Service, said: "This is a devastating incident, and our thoughts are very much with the family and friends of those who have lost their lives and been injured. 
"We will work closely with relevant colleagues to ascertain the cause of the fire, but in the immediate term, we again extend our sincere condolences to those affected by this tragic incident."

Get in touch

Tell us which stories we should cover on Merseyside

Contact form
Contact form

Listen to the best of BBC Radio Merseyside on Sounds and follow BBC Merseyside on Facebook, external, X, external, and Instagram, external. You can also send story ideas via Whatsapp to 0808 100 2230.

Related topics

Bootle