URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cmwyz2pvw058o
OUTLET/TIME: title=Drug deaths rise sharply in Scotland as figures remain worst in EuropeBritish Broadcasting CorporationBritish Broadcasting Corporation | datePublished=2026-09-23T08:32:33.893Z | dateModified=2026-09-23T14:43:32.291Z

Drug deaths rise sharply in Scotland as figures remain worst in Europe

Skip to content

Site search

Home

News

Sport

Business

Technology

Health

Culture

Arts

Travel

Earth

Audio

Video

Live

Weather
Newsletters

Drug deaths rise sharply in Scotland as figures remain worst in Europe

2 hours ago
ShareSave

Add as preferred on Google

James Cook,Scotland editorand
Aimee Stanton,data journalist

Deaths related to illicit drugs rose by 11% in Scotland last year to 1,133 as the country struggles to tackle the worst fatality rate in Europe.

National Records of Scotland (NRS) said the figure for 2025 was 116 higher than the previous year, bringing the total deaths in a decade to more than 11,000.

After adjusting for age, there were 214 drug-related deaths per million people.

NRS defines drug-related deaths as those where the underlying cause was drug poisoning, a controlled substance was in the body at the time of death, and drug use led directly to the death.

Efforts to save lives over the past year have been hampered by criminal gangs mixing powerful synthetic opioids such as nitazenes with existing drugs including heroin, cocaine and fake Valium pills. 

Nitazenes were implicated in 247 deaths in 2025 - more than 22% of the total. The figure had more than trebled from 76 deaths the previous year.

Opiates and opioids, such as heroin, continued to be the most common type of drug implicated in deaths, accounting for 78% of the total.

Cocaine was implicated in 52% of deaths, the highest figure since NRS began publishing specific data in 2008.

NRS said the increase in deaths - which came after a 13% fall in 2024 - had been driven by a rise in deaths of male drug users. This increased by 19%, while the rate of female deaths fell by 5%.

The rate of drug-related deaths in the most deprived areas of Scotland was 15 times as high as in the least deprived areas.

The average age of death has increased from 32 in 2000 to 46 years in 2025.

Over a five-year period from 2021-25, Glasgow recorded the highest average death rate at 380 per million, followed by 340 per million in Dundee and 310 per million in North Ayrshire.

When comparing Scotland with the rest of Europe, NRS measures the death rate among 15-64 year olds - which was 277 per million in 2025.

The next highest rate in Europe was Estonia with 112 deaths per million in 2024, the most recent year for which figures are available from the European Union Drugs Agency (EUDA).

Scotland's death rate in 2024 was 246 per million.

NRS says its methodology produces "similar" outcomes to EUDA's count of "drug-induced deaths", with the caveat that the two methods use slightly different lists of drugs.

When comparing Scotland with the rest of the UK, NRS uses a wider measure of age-adjusted drug poisoning deaths.

This includes all deaths where the underlying cause was listed as mental and behavioural disorders due to psychoactive substance abuse or poisoning by drugs whether accidental, intentional, of unknown intent or as a result of assault.

The most recent comparable data from 2024 shows that Scotland had an age-adjusted death rate of 216 per million compared with 91 for England, 140 for Wales and 135 for Northern Ireland.

Catriona Matheson, professor of substance use at Stirling University, said the "deeply concerning" increase in deaths was being driven by significant changes in the drug market - including the growth of nitazenes.

She told BBC Radio Scotland Breakfast that their potency was unpredictable and that some could be 50 times stronger than heroin.

"People are not expecting that in the drugs that they're taking," she said.

"They may be buying what they think is heroin and in fact it may contain several other substances in it."

Matheson said an increase in "polydrug use" in recent years, where people take more than one substance, had contributed to the problem and could prove to be lethal.

Kirsten Horsburgh, chief executive of the Scottish Drugs Forum, said the link between deprivation, health inequalities and drug-related deaths was "really stark".

"The risk is we become fixed on chasing individual substances in an unregulated market and we lose sight of the individual circumstances that are related to that," she said.

"Drugs don't explain the extraordinary inequality and social disparity that we see in these deaths.

"Drug-related deaths are an extremely visible manifestation of who gets to live long and healthy lives."

In a statement to parliament, Alcohol and Drugs Minister Maree Todd described the deaths as devastating, deeply concerning and unacceptable. 

She warned of growing risks from "highly potent synthetic substances, changing patterns of drug use, and high levels of people using multiple drugs at the same time".

Todd told MSPs that bereaved families remained "at the heart" of the government's approach. 

She said ministers had funded more than 1,100 residential rehabilitation placements last year and had increased the country's rehabilitation bed capacity. However, she said there was much more to be done. 

Todd told parliament that a new strategic plan would deepen links between treatment, housing and other services, and target support at the communities most at risk.

She noted that the the country's first local drug-checking service would open in Glasgow next month. MSPs were told similar sites would soon open in Aberdeen, Dundee, to be followed by a facility in Edinburgh. 

The minister also vowed to improve information sharing and accountability, and to address workforce issues. 

She added: "Our vision is for a Scotland where people receive the support they need in their communities with a system that not only treats illness but helps to prevent it through earlier intervention." 

At Holyrood, Scottish Labour's health spokesperson Jackie Baillie described the figures as "a national scandal".

She accused the government of working at a "snail's pace" to introduce drug-checking services, and questioned whether measures introduced by the government would keep up with developments in synthetic substances. 

Reform UK Scotland deputy leader Thomas Kerr accused ministers of failing families and urged them to "wake up and take action".

He called for a dedicated government department to tackle drug deaths and more funding for rehabilitation. 

Scottish Conservative spokesman Miles Briggs said there had been 16,082 drugs deaths in the past 20 years, equivalent to the population of St Andrews. 

"If the Scottish government was a health board, it would be put into special measures," he told MSPs. 

Briggs said there needed to be a "national shift to rehabilitation and a right to recovery". 

Scottish Liberal Democrat spokesman Adam Harley urged the government to roll out safer drugs consumption centres across the country "so that people at greatest risk have life-saving support and better access to other services". 

Maree Todd said it was "not a simple process" to open such facilities across the country, but that the process had begun in Edinburgh. She added that drug-checking facilities should be available to all those who take drugs, but that they were restricted under Home Office rules to people who are dependent on one or more illicit drugs. 

In a statement, Scottish Green spokesperson Kayleigh Kinross-O'Neill said a major expansion of harm reduction and treatment services was needed, including safe consumption facilities, drug checking, heroin-assisted treatment and stabilisation services.

The deadly new drugs making Scotland's fight against addiction even harder

Scottish drug deaths fall but remain worst in Europe

Scotland
Scotland drug deaths
Scotland health