URL: https://www.telegraph.co.uk/world-news/2026/09/23/kremlin-accuses-burnham-of-stoking-anti-russian-sentiment/
OUTLET/TIME: Telegraph UNGA live blog (Lilia Sebouai) | last updated 23 Sep 2026 14:52 BST — captured via Exa fetch

UN General Assembly latest: Kremlin accuses Burnham of 'stoking anti-Russian sentiment'

Andy Burnham is fuelling "anti-Russian sentiment", the Kremlin said after the Prime Minister accused Moscow of interference and disinformation.

On Tuesday, Mr Burnham told the UN General Assembly (UNGA) in New York that Britain would set up a National Centre for Information Defence, singling out Russia for spreading lies online.

Dmitry Peskov, Vladimir Putin's spokesman, criticised Mr Burnham's approach, as well as that of other European leaders, as "utterly short-sighted".

"Well, the British prime minister said nothing new. That is the first point. The second is that stoking anti-Russian sentiment and fostering an atmosphere of total Russophobia is what Britain is doing. And now, presumably in unison with Britain, the Germans, the French and a number of other European states are doing the same thing," Mr Peskov said.

"From our point of view, this is an utterly short-sighted policy. It in no way brings us any closer to any steps that might, in the long term, lead to a reduction in tensions and de-escalation on the European continent."

In a speech to UNGA this afternoon, Masoud Pezeshkian, Iran's president, is expected to strongly criticise the US and Israel.

US Secretary of State Marco Rubio is meeting with Russia's Foreign Minister on the sidelines of the General Assembly. Earlier, Sergey Lavrov said there were still no grounds for Ukraine peace talks to take place, even though Russia remained open to such talks. "For now, there are no prerequisites for moving onto a peaceful negotiating track, although we, as the Russian side, remain open to peace talks," Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters.

Syria's Ahmed al-Sharaa addressed the assembly this afternoon: "We reject Israeli attempts to impose a fait accompli."
