URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cq62k1947l7po
OUTLET/TIME: title=RAF Valley plane crash on Anglesey as two pilots eject - BBC News | datePublished=2026-09-23T13:06:52.746Z | dateModified=2026-09-23T15:18:40.670Z

RAF Valley plane crash on Anglesey as two pilots eject - BBC News

ByRowenna Hoskin
BBC Wales

Published

23 September 2026, 14:06 BST

Updated 1 hour ago

Two pilots ejected and parachuted out of their plane before the RAF training aircraft crashed.
North Wales Police said the pilots of the RAF T2 Hawk aircraft were being treated for minor injuries following the incident in the Pencarnisiog area of Anglesey.
The force said helicopters from the Coastguard and the Wales Air Ambulance were sent to the scene close to RAF Valley on the island. The pilots have been taken to Birmingham for treatment.
A spokesperson for the RAF said it is currently investigating the crash. 

Image gallerySkip image gallery

1 of 5
Previous imageNext imageSlide 1 of 5, Two figures floating in the sky with parachutes, The two pilots were able to eject themselves before the plane crashed

End of image gallery

"Two pilots are being treated for what are thought to be minor injuries and at this stage there are no reports of any wider damage or injuries," North Wales Police said. 
"Please avoid the area until further notice."
The two air ambulances which were at the scene of the Hawk T2 crash in Llanfaelog have both landed at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham, home of the Royal Centre for Defence Medicine (RCDM).
The Royal Air Force said: "An incident involving an RAF T2 Hawk aircraft, flying out of RAF Valley.
"An investigation is under way and we will not comment further at this time."
One eyewitness told North Wales Live he had watched the aircraft take off before the crash.
Pete Bennett said: "I knew straight away that it was in trouble - right on take-off there was an orange flame and as it accelerated it was basically on fire.
"As it gained altitude the flame disappeared but it was clearly in trouble.
"It climbed at an aggressive pitch. It pitched twice violently in the air and then there were two clear loud bangs.
"The pilots ejected and both parachutes opened."

Defence Secretary Wes Streeting posted on X: "An investigation is under way. 
"My thoughts are first and foremost with the pilots. We will provide further updates in due course."
Leader of Reform UK Wales Helen Jenner said: "I grew up in Bodorgan, just along the coast from Valley. 
"RAF Valley is part of the fabric of Anglesey. 
"It has trained generations of fast-jet pilots, and our island is proud to be home to the men and women who serve there."
The Senedd member for Bangor Conwy Môn said the incident has left her "deeply concerned" and her thoughts were with the crew, their families and everyone at the base.
BBC security analyst Mikey Kay described footage of the pilots ejecting being caught on camera as "quite remarkable".
He said the pilots' ejection seat was "one of the big lifesavers in this whole story".
"The aircraft seat is designed for the pilot to be able to eject at zero speed and zero height, and that will allow enough time for the parachute to inflate, and then the pilots hit the ground," he added.

What is RAF Valley?

Fighter pilots are trained at RAF Valley and it is also a base for maritime and search and rescue operations.
The MOD describes its No 4 Flying Training School as responsible for training the "next generation of world-class fighter pilots, external".
It opened in February 1941 and became a staging post for US aircraft to help the war effort from 1943.
The Prince of Wales was an RAF search and rescue pilot at the Holyhead base from 2010 to 2013 and lived on Anglesey with the Princess of Wales as newlyweds.
He returned in April to mark it 85th anniversary, where he spoke of his "fond memories" of the base. 
Separately, a publicly-funded airport operated between Anglesey and Cardiff between 2007 and 2020.

Related topics

RAF Valley
Wales

More top stories

Student who accidentally overdosed on paracetamol learns to walk and talk again

Published
1 day ago

BBC weatherman announces he's walking away from role after 30 years

Published
22 hours ago

Drunk teacher struck pupil on school trip, hearing told

Published
21 hours ago