URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/hope-progress-after-us-iran-hold-first-shuttle-talks-months-2026-09-23/
Reuters — published 23 Sep 2026 11:31 BST (updated 16:00 BST)
Headline: Pezeshkian says Iran won't surrender, after Trump's annihilation threat (earlier: First US-Iran talks in months raise hopes for progress despite no concessions)

Summary: Trump says he sees 'a lot of momentum for them to make a deal'. Iran says minister conveyed demand for halt to US 'aggression'. Contacts cause backlash in hardline Iranian media. Oil prices slide to near two-week lows.

UNITED NATIONS/DUBAI, Sept 23 (Reuters) - Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian said in a speech at the UN on Wednesday that Tehran would never surrender to the US but still believes in diplomacy, a day after President Donald Trump used the same forum to threaten to "annihilate" Iran.

The duelling speeches bookended the first shuttle talks between the United States and Iran for months, which appeared to have yielded no concessions in the public stance of either side towards ending the Middle East war.

In his speech, Pezeshkian defended Iran's military actions as defensive, and insisted Iran was not seeking nuclear weapons.

In a potential new flashpoint, Iran also threatened to act against its neighbours if they abide by new US sanctions intended to ground Iranian civilian aircraft worldwide. Washington has said it will impose so-called secondary sanctions against any country that allows Iranian flights after Wednesday. Mohsen Rezaei, secretary of Iran's Supreme National Security Council, told state TV Iran would ensure neighbouring countries' airports could not function if they stop Iranian flights.

The annual UN gathering provided the occasion on Tuesday for Iranian and US officials to hold their first known indirect talks since a ceasefire collapsed in July, with Iran's Foreign Minister Abbas Araqchi and US envoys Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner communicating through mediators on the sidelines.

"Steve and Jared had a very productive meeting today with mediators of Iran," Trump said on Tuesday after his own speech. "I think there's a lot of momentum for them to make a deal. It's what we're hearing from everybody."

Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesperson Esmail Baghaei said Tehran had engaged with Washington through a Qatari mediator and conveyed conditions, including an end to the war on all fronts and a halt to US "acts of aggression".

Some Iranian state media initially reported that Araqchi and Witkoff had met, but Iranian officials clarified to Reuters that it was not face-to-face.

IRAN HARDLINERS RESIST DIPLOMATIC MOVES: An opinion piece run by the semi-official Tasnim news agency, associated with the Revolutionary Guards, said Araqchi was wrong to have contacts with Witkoff and Kushner, "a major gift to Trump", as Iran had already conveyed its terms. Iranian sources told Reuters the delegation had been ordered not to meet the Americans face-to-face by the Supreme National Security Council, a body that includes figures selected by Ayatollah Mojtaba Khamenei, the supreme leader. Khamenei has yet to appear in public since replacing his father, who was killed on the war's first day.

OIL PRICES HOLD NEAR TWO-WEEK LOW: Brent crude hovered around $100 a barrel after surging earlier this month when Yemen's Iran-backed Houthis launched a major offensive, threatening traffic through the Red Sea.

The war, launched by Trump in February alongside Israel as "Operation Epic Fury", has lasted nearly seven months, killing thousands of people, disrupting global energy supplies and spreading to other countries in the region — particularly to Lebanon and more recently to Yemen.

An interim agreement reached in June, signed by Trump and Pezeshkian, would have given Iran its main demands: lifting financial sanctions and unfreezing assets in return for talks on limiting its nuclear programme. But that deal unravelled within weeks over shipping rules in the Strait of Hormuz. Iran wants to exert control and collect fees from ships that use it, which Washington rejects.

In the latest reported attack in the strait, Britain's UKMTO maritime security agency said a cargo ship had been hit by projectiles, causing two casualties among the crew. The crew had been evacuated and the ship was on fire and adrift. (Separate Reuters 17:21 BST: one Indian national killed in attack on bulk carrier MV Cape Dao heading towards India, Indian embassy in Oman said.)

Despite near-daily attacks, traffic through the strait has picked up in recent weeks. Exports from the UAE have already recovered to pre-war levels, and Saudi Arabia has sold 60 million barrels of Gulf oil for both this month and next. Nevertheless, a third of Gulf oil is estimated to be missing from global supplies. Shortages have particularly hit refined products such as diesel.

Reporting by Reuters bureaux; writing by Peter Graff; editing by Ros Russell and Gareth Jones. Authors listed: Parisa Hafezi, Humeyra Pamuk, Jana Choukeir.

Witkoff X post (Tue 22 Sep, quoted by Al Jazeera 23 Sep 05:42 BST https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/9/23/us-iran-hold-mediated-unga-talks-on-ending-war-opening-strait-of-hormuz): "Today, on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly, we engaged in lengthy talks with the Iranian delegation through the mediators, who shuttled between the two sides throughout the day. They successfully completed a round of discussions that we hope will prove constructive and promising. The mediators will continue their work."
