URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/china/trump-plans-grand-spectacle-potentially-tense-xi-talks-2026-09-23/
Reuters — published 23 Sep 2026 11:01 BST (updated 17:34 BST)
Headline: Trump plans grand spectacle for potentially tense Xi talks

Summary: First Xi visit to US in nearly three years. Low expectations for a breakthrough. Trade, technology, Tehran and Taiwan top agenda.

WASHINGTON, Sept 23 (Reuters) - US President Donald Trump welcomes Chinese President Xi Jinping to Washington on Wednesday for a three-day visit where the superpowers' tensions over trade, technology and Tehran will play out against a backdrop of pomp and ceremony.

For the Chinese leader's first trip to the US in nearly three years, Trump will greet Xi and his wife on the tarmac when they arrive Wednesday evening at the Maryland military base that hosts Air Force One.

The fanfare was due to include a state dinner with tech luminaries, a White House military ceremony including jet flyovers and a visit to the National Archives where the original Declaration of Independence and Constitution are housed.

Expectations for a breakthrough during Xi's visit were slim. The countries' 11-month trade truce sunsets in November, but the two sides are at odds on issues ranging from Taiwan to narcotics and rare-earth minerals.

People familiar with the plans said Xi was likely to forcefully raise Beijing's claim to Taiwan, a topic Washington would prefer to avoid, while Trump was likely to maintain firm US export controls despite Xi's objections.

But talks set for Thursday could nonetheless yield deals to lower tariffs in specific sectors, cooperate on drug trafficking and expand military-to-military dialogue. Trump is expected to seek the release of some Americans and others detained in China, according to the people. The two countries could also agree to talk more on AI.

The meeting comes at a difficult moment for Trump, who faces falling approval numbers as public discontent with his war on Iran grows. Xi arrives in a seemingly stronger position, with his country's trade engine roaring.

Edgard Kagan (CSIS, former White House official): "The president very much believes that over time the US economy is going to grow, the US will get stronger. I think when Xi Jinping sits down with Donald Trump, he very much believes the US is in hurtling decline, and that time is on China's side."

STATE DINNER WITH AI CHIEFS: A state dinner on Thursday is expected to bring together chiefs of companies like Apple's Tim Cook, Nvidia's Jensen Huang and OpenAI's Sam Altman. Instead of a joint press conference or statement at the end, the countries are expected to issue dueling announcements.

Nearly seven months of war with Iran have spiked energy prices in the US, and the president's Republican Party faces tough prospects in November's congressional elections.

Another meeting between Trump and Xi is seen as likely this year, potentially on the sidelines of the APEC summit in China in November or the G20 meetings in the US in December.

AREAS OF TENSION INCLUDE IRAN, ELECTIONS, TAIWAN: Iran is likely to feature. Beijing has maintained close ties with Tehran. Washington thinks Beijing could use its influence over Tehran, but Trump has said he sees no need to seek China's help. Beijing, the world's biggest oil importer, helped stabilize crude prices after the war started by cutting demand and releasing strategic stockpiles. The Trump administration withheld secondary sanctions on major banks in China, Tehran's largest trading partner.

Xi is also expected to push Trump to decrease arms sales to Taiwan. In December, the Trump administration approved an $11 billion arms sale to Taiwan, the largest ever. A second package, worth some $14 billion, has been on hold for months. Trump has described the arms sales as a "very good negotiating chip."

Reporting by Trevor Hunnicutt; additional reporting by David Brunnstrom, Yimou Lee and Ben Blanchard.

Also seen on page (Reuters, 23 Sep): "China's Xi to visit Washington without CEO delegation, sources say" (15:34 BST); "US senators aim to fast-track Chinese vehicle ban this week as Xi visits" (17:10 BST).
