URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/ethiopian-airlines-suspends-flights-tigray-region-2026-01-07/
Reuters — published 23 Sep 2026 11:21 BST (updated 13:51 BST)
Headline: Tigrayan leaders say new war with Ethiopian government has begun, as fighting erupts

Summary: Tigrayan forces announce they have 'entered a defensive war'. Forces seized airports in Tigray overnight. Four sources confirm fighting in Tigray, Afar and Amhara. TPLF has formed alliance with six armed groups to overthrow Abiy.

Sept 23 (Reuters) - Forces from the northern Ethiopian region of Tigray launched a major offensive against the federal government on Wednesday, a senior Ethiopian official said, shattering a four-year-old peace deal and threatening a wider regional conflict.

Tigray's leaders said in a statement they had entered a "defensive" war to counter aggression by the federal government.

A civil war that began in 2020 between the TPLF and federal forces resulted in hundreds of thousands of deaths before the Pretoria Agreement was signed in November 2022.

The new hostilities follow months of growing animosity, capped by Sunday's announcement that the TPLF had formed an alliance with six other armed groups from across Ethiopia aimed at overthrowing Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed's government.

The TPLF-led regional administration said there had been an "intensification of the invasion conducted through various methods" by Abiy's government against the people of Tigray. "The Tigray Forces have been instructed to counter the attack and have entered a defensive war," it said in a statement.

Getachew Reda, an adviser to Abiy and a former TPLF official, wrote on X that the TPLF had seized control of federally controlled airports in Tigray and launched an "all-out offensive" against government positions in the neighbouring regions of Afar and Amhara. "The TPLF politico-military leadership has obviously taken irresponsibility to new heights," he said.

Ethiopian Airlines suspended flights to the region.

FEARS OF A WIDER WAR: Spokespeople for Abiy, the federal government and the TPLF did not immediately respond. Regional diplomats and analysts have warned for months that a resumption of the conflict in Tigray could quickly escalate into a wider war, overlapping with fighting in neighbouring Sudan and further roiling the volatile Red Sea region.

In the 2020-2022 Tigray war, Eritrea backed the government against the TPLF. But relations have soured since. Abiy's spokesperson, Billene Seyoum, told Reuters on Monday that members of the newly announced alliance had been collaborating for a while with Eritrea's financial backing. Eritrea has repeatedly denied it.

ARMED GROUPS SIDE WITH TIGRAYANS: In Afar, Tigrayan forces were fighting alongside a local armed group, and in Amhara, alongside the Fano militia, according to a senior Ethiopian government official, a diplomatic source, a humanitarian source and another source. The regional government in Afar accused the TPLF of launching an invasion. The scale and intensity of the fighting were not clear.

In May, the TPLF seized control of the region's government from the interim administration established under the peace deal. The Ethiopian military has carried out several drone strikes against Tigrayan forces, according to ACLED data. On Tuesday, the US government condemned a recent drone strike on a Catholic Relief Services humanitarian convoy in Tigray and urged a full investigation. The federal government has not commented on any of the reported strikes.

Reuters explainer also published 23 Sep 17:17 BST: "Why new war in Ethiopia's Tigray threatens to trigger wider conflict" https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/why-new-war-ethiopias-tigray-threatens-trigger-wider-conflict-2026-09-23/
