URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pm-meeting-with-president-zelenskyy-of-ukraine-22-september-2026
OUTLET/TIME: title=PM meeting with President Zelenskyy of Ukraine: 22 September 2026 - GOV.UKGOV.UK | datePublished=2026-09-23T07:04:00+01:00 | dateModified=2026-09-23T07:04:00+01:00

PM meeting with President Zelenskyy of Ukraine: 22 September 2026 - GOV.UK

Cookies on GOV.UK

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

 Accept additional cookies

 Reject additional cookies

 View cookies

 Hide cookie message

 Skip to main content

 Press release

 PM meeting with President Zelenskyy of Ukraine: 22 September 2026

 The Prime Minister met the President of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, yesterday at UN General Assembly.

 From:

 Prime Minister's Office, 10 Downing Street and The Rt Hon Andy Burnham MP

 Published:
 23 September 2026

The Prime Minister met the President of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, this afternoon at UN General Assembly.

The Prime Minister reflected on his meeting with President Trump earlier in the day and welcomed the passing of the Graham Bill last week. 

The leaders discussed the tough winter ahead, and the proposal for an energy ceasefire. The Prime Minister condemned Russia’s ongoing attacks on Ukraine and said the UK was four-square behind Ukraine.

Turning to peace negotiations, the President updated the Prime Minister on the latest and leaders underlined the need for Putin to take part in meaningful talks to end the war.

That included the need to keep increasing pressure on Russia through sanctions to ensure he came to the table, both agreed.

They looked forward to speaking again soon.

Share this page

 The following links open in a new tab

 Share on Facebook

 (opens in new tab)

 Share on X

 (opens in new tab)

Is this page useful?

 Maybe

 Yes this page is useful

 No this page is not useful

 Thank you for your feedback

 Report a problem with this page

Help us improve GOV.UK

Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

 This field is for robots only. Please leave blank

 What were you doing?

 What went wrong?

 Send

 Cancel

Help us improve GOV.UK

 To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
 Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab).

 Cancel