URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ck1l6yyg52qvo
BBC — published 23 Sep 2026 12:30 BST (David Gritten)
Headline: Netanyahu calls Macron's remarks on West Bank in UN speech 'grotesque'

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has condemned French President Emmanuel Macron after he criticised Israel's actions in the occupied West Bank during his address to the UN General Assembly.

"Look at what's happening in the West Bank, where day in, day out, we are seeing violations. And in the name of what? Hamas was never very active in the West Bank," Macron said in French, according to the UN's interpreter.

Netanyahu called the remarks a "grotesque absurdity" and said members of the Palestinian armed group there "carry out attacks against Jews almost every day".

There was no response from Macron's office, but one French diplomatic source said there had been a "misinterpretation". The source told the Jerusalem Post that the meaning of the French sentence, "Le Hamas n'a jamais sévi en Cisjordanie," was, "Hamas has never governed the West Bank."

Macron also rejected US President Donald Trump's assertion that he had ended the war between Israel and Hamas in the Gaza Strip. "Some boast of a supposed peace. But that peace has not reopened humanitarian access for a single second," he said. "Are we simply to stand by and watch this spectacle that should shame us all?"

After the address, the Israeli prime minister's office said in a statement: "The grotesque absurdity of Emmanuel Macron's statement is staggering."

"On Sunday, the eve of [the Jewish holy day of] Yom Kippur, just two days ago, Netanel Shukrun - a French citizen and father of six - was murdered in his car by a Hamas terrorist in Judea and Samaria," it added. "Hamas terrorists carry out attacks against Jews almost every day. They have murdered countless Israeli civilians in Judea and Samaria."

The US ambassador to Israel, Mike Huckabee, also denounced Macron's remarks as "out of touch with reality".

Shukrun, 36, was shot dead when a Palestinian opened fire on a group of Israelis at a spring near the West Bank settlement of Neve Tzuf, according to Israeli police. The suspect was arrested later at a hospital in Ramallah. Hamas praised the attack but did not say it was behind it.

Israel has built about 160 settlements housing 700,000 Jews since 1967. An estimated 3.3 million Palestinians live alongside them. The settlements are illegal under international law.

Other approved-source coverage: Telegraph https://www.telegraph.co.uk/world-news/2026/09/23/macrons-un-speech-grotesque-absurdity-netanyahu-israel-gaza/ ; Times of Israel (newsroom) https://www.timesofisrael.com/netanyahu-decries-macrons-grotesque-claim-that-hamas-never-operated-in-west-bank/ — ToI: Netanyahu "is expected to deliver a defiant address to the world body on Thursday".
