URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pm-meeting-with-president-zelenskyy-of-ukraine-22-september-2026
GOV.UK (Prime Minister's Office) — readout of PM meeting with President Zelenskyy, 22 Sep 2026, published 23 Sep

Cookies on GOV.UK

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

PM meeting with President Zelenskyy of Ukraine: 22 September 2026

The Prime Minister met the President of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, yesterday at UN General Assembly.

The Prime Minister met the President of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, this afternoon at UN General Assembly.

The Prime Minister reflected on his meeting with President Trump earlier in the day and welcomed the passing of the Graham Bill last week.

The leaders discussed the tough winter ahead, and the proposal for an energy ceasefire. The Prime Minister condemned Russia’s ongoing attacks on Ukraine and said the UK was four-square behind Ukraine.

Turning to peace negotiations, the President updated the Prime Minister on the latest and leaders underlined the need for Putin to take part in meaningful talks to end the war.

That included the need to keep increasing pressure on Russia through sanctions to ensure he came to the table, both agreed.

They looked forward to speaking again soon.

Share this page

The following links open in a new tab

Share on Facebook (opens in new tab)

Share on X (opens in new tab)

Is this page useful?

Maybe

Yes this page is useful

No this page is not useful

Help us improve GOV.UK

Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

Help us improve GOV.UK

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab).
