URL: https://news.met.police.uk/news/update-counter-terrorism-policing-arrests-in-manchester-513132
Metropolitan Police (official) — 22 Sep 2026 16:30

The information on this page is intended for journalists, press and media. Click YES to get to the newsroom. If you click NO you will come back to Mynewsdesk.com.

22 September 2026 16:30

UPDATE: Counter Terrorism Policing arrests in Manchester

Two men who were arrested in Manchester on Sunday, 20 September as part of a Counter Terrorism Policing London investigation remain in police custody.

The men, who are in their 30s, were arrested on suspicion of offences under Section 41 of the Terrorism Act 2000. The investigation relates to a suspected terrorist plot to target the Jewish community in the Manchester area.

Deputy Assistant Commissioner Vicki Evans, Senior National Coordinator for Counter Terrorism Policing, said “This has been a long-running proactive investigation which has led to the disruption of what we believe to be a plot to target the Jewish community in the Manchester area. Counter Terrorism policing continue to focus our efforts on identifying and disrupting those who wish to cause harm in our communities.’

“We are acutely aware this news will cause further concern to the Jewish community, as well as the wider public, especially given the significant High Holy day period. I want to reassure them we are working incredibly closely with colleagues in Greater Manchester Police and partners to ensure we’re doing everything we can to keep them and the wider public safe. And more broadly, across the country CTP is working with local police forces to provide protective security support and advice for areas with Jewish communities, and particularly during the High Holy Day period.

“As we have shown with these arrests, where we suspect there could be a threat to the public, then we will not hesitate to investigate and take action.

“We are pursuing a number of lines enquiry and we anticipate these will continue over the coming days as this investigation continues.

“Importantly, we do not believe there to be any ongoing threat to the public in relation to this matter, but as ever, we would ask that people remain vigilant and contact police with any concerns.”

The two men were arrested in Newton Street, Manchester and were subsequently taken to a London police station, where they currently remain in police custody.

On Tuesday, 22 September, officers obtained warrants of further detention for both men, meaning they can be detained in police custody up until Sunday, 27 September.

Searches at addresses in Epworth Street, Liverpool and Lancaster Road, Salford have now been completed.

The investigation is being supported by colleagues from CTP North West, Greater Manchester Police and Merseyside Police and enquiries remain ongoing.

Anyone with information or concerns can report them via gov.uk/ACT or by calling police, in confidence, on 0800 789 321. In an emergency, always dial 999.

Topics

Police matters

Human Rights

Terrorism

Conflicts

Categories

Arrest

Counter Terrorism Command

Regions

England

London

Contacts

Newsdesk

Related media

Update MyNewsDesk Header image25.jpg License: Media Use File format: .jpg Size: 4444 x 2500, 1010 KB more info... Download

When you choose to create a user account and follow a newsroom your personal data will be used by us and the owner of the newsroom, for you to receive news and updates according to your subscription settings.

To learn more about this, please read our Privacy Policy, which applies to our use of your personal data, and our Privacy Policy for Contacts, which applies to the use of your personal data by the owner of the newsroom you follow.

Please note that our Terms of Use apply to all use of our services.

You can withdraw your consent at any time by unsubscribing or deleting your account.
