URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/china/chinas-us-ambassador-warns-red-lines-ahead-trump-xi-meeting-2026-09-23/
Reuters — Liz Lee (Beijing), Yimou Lee and Ben Blanchard (Taipei) — published 2026-09-23T00:42Z (01:42 BST Wed 23 Sep), updated 05:14Z

Taiwan, human rights are 'red lines' for China, ambassador says ahead of Trump, Xi meeting
Summary: Presidents Xi and Trump to meet in Washington this week; China has repeatedly called for end to US arms sales to Taiwan; US has yet to approve new $14 bln arms package for Taiwan; People's Daily says US has 'erroneous' perceptions of China

BEIJING/TAIPEI, Sept 23 (Reuters) - Taiwan and human rights are "red lines" for China that cannot be crossed, the country's ambassador to the US warned on Wednesday, striking a firm tone ahead of this week's leadership summit in Washington.
Chinese President Xi Jinping will visit Washington for a summit with President Donald Trump, as both sides look to bring stability to ties overshadowed by arguments over everything from trade to Taiwan.
Writing in the ruling Communist Party's official People's Daily on the day Xi is due to leave, Ambassador Xie Feng said managing differences hinges on good faith, and the US should stop "fabricating pretexts" such as national security, economic imbalances and forced labour to try to and constrain China.
When China and the US cooperate, both benefit, but when they confront each other, both suffer, he added.
"China's sovereignty, security, and development interests cannot be violated, and four red lines — the Taiwan question, democracy and human rights, development paths and systems, and development rights — cannot be challenged," Xie said.
"China is committed to pursuing peaceful development and hopes the US will move toward this as well."
China claims democratically governed Taiwan as its own territory, despite the objections of the government in Taipei.

TAIWAN TENSIONS
The US is Taiwan's most important arms supplier and international backer, and China has repeatedly demanded weapons sales to Taiwan end.
After a May summit in Beijing with Xi, Trump said he was holding a new arms package, worth around $14 billion, in abeyance and described it as a "very good negotiating chip".
A senior Taiwan security official told reporters that Beijing views any delay in US arms transfers as a direct way to slow Taiwan's military build up, giving China more room to expand pressure around Taiwan, Japan and the Philippines.
China could use a package of inducements, including purchases of US goods or gestures on Middle East tensions, to convince Trump that reduced US military commitments in the region could buy broader cooperation from Beijing, the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
China's military has significantly increased the number of naval, coast guard and research ships around Taiwan, in the South and East China Seas, and collecting data on things like undersea cables that could be useful for war, the official said.
China's foreign ministry reiterated its "resolute opposition" to US arms sales, saying the Taiwan issue was its "core of core interests" and the political foundation of Sino-US ties.
In Beijing, a spokesperson for Taiwan Affairs Office said it was Taiwan that was "deliberately" escalating confrontation. "Scheming for independence is the primary culprit in destroying peace and stability in the Taiwan Strait and undermining the status quo," spokesperson Zhu Fenglian said.

'ERRONEOUS' US PERCEPTIONS
A separate commentary on Wednesday in the People's Daily said Washington's "erroneous" perceptions of China and its inability to let go of the notion of strategic competition are the basic causes of their difficult relationship.
"The US side, in particular, needs to maintain continuity and stability in its policies, honour its commitments, and inject certainty into bilateral relations," it added.
