URL: https://news.sky.com/story/mondays-newspaper-front-pages-12427754
Sky News — "Wednesday's newspaper front pages", page dated Tuesday 22 September 2026 23:10 UK (scraped via Firecrawl 23 Sep ~07:50 BST; Sky's own summary language)

The i Paper: The PM has told business chiefs that he wants a "single set of global principles" to guard against rogue artificial intelligence, writes The i Paper.

The Times: Prime Minister Andy Burnham has agreed to review the UK's plans to hand sovereignty of the Chagos Islands to Mauritius following Donald Trump's criticism of the deal, writes The Times.

The Daily Telegraph: Prime Minister Andy Burnham is reviewing the Chagos Islands deal after it was labelled "terrible" by Donald Trump during a meeting between the two at the UN General Assembly on Tuesday, reports The Daily Telegraph.

Daily Mail: The Daily Mail writes that Andy Burnham "triggered Donald Trump's wrath" during a first face-to-face meeting between the two leaders, after the US president criticised the UK's Chagos Islands deal.

The Guardian: The Guardian leads on the meeting between Andy Burnham and Donald Trump on Tuesday, after which the US president said his relationship with the UK is "more up" than it was under Sir Keir Starmer. However, Trump also described the UK's Chagos Islands deal as "terrible".

Daily Mirror: The Daily Mirror writes that Andy Burnham "pulled off a tricky" first in-person meeting with Donald Trump at the UN General Assembly, with the US president saying the PM "gets it".

The Sun: The Sun's front page features Piers Morgan, who has called for Earl Spencer's book about Princess Diana to be withdrawn after the earl issued an apology for an error made about Morgan in the book.

Daily Star: The US president spoke positively about the country's relationship with Britain following a first face-to-face meeting with Andy Burnham, but blasted the UK government's Chagos Islands deal, reports the Daily Star.

Daily Express: Donald Trump labelled the UK government's Chagos Islands agreement a "terrible deal" during his first in-person meeting with Prime Minister Andy Burnham on Tuesday, writes the Daily Express.

Financial Times: Billionaire Todd Boehly - who last week left his role as chairman of Premier League club Chelsea after selling his ownership stake - has secured the backing of the US government to bid for the international assets of a Russian oil company, reports the Financial Times.

Metro: A teenager stabbed a girl 10 times after she refused to go out with him, the Metro reports, in an incident detectives have likened to the TV drama series Adolescence.
