URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ckj0lj6v3g9vo
BBC 12:53

Widdecombe suspect accused of trying to break into Farage's home

A court sketch of Joshua Kerry, surrounded by three guards. He has a beard and wears glasses.

The man accused of murdering the former MP Ann Widdecombe in July has appeared in court faced with a new allegation of preparing terrorist acts, including trying to break into the home of Reform UK leader Nigel Farage.

Prosecutor Kashif Malik said Joshua Kerry, 28, is alleged to have carried out online reconnaissance of \"prominent people and institutions... including identifying the home address of Nigel Farage\".

The prosecutor later told Westminster Magistrates' Court that damage was found on the doorframe at Farage's home address, adding: \"the inference is that an attempt was made to gain entry to the house\".

Kerry was accompanied by four custody officers in the dock and was remanded in custody to appear at the Old Bailey on Friday.

Kerry appeared in person the court. With a thick beard and wearing a grey sweatshirt and trousers, he spoke only to confirm his address in Rotherham and his date of birth.

He was told he faced a new charge of preparing terrorist acts between 31 May 2024 and 8 July 2026 by carrying out research on targets and travelling to, and attempting to gain entry to, the home of Nigel Farage.

The court heard that in April 2025 Nigel Farage's partner found that damage had been caused to their main front door at their house and a bottle of lighter fluid was found in the porch.

Kerry was charged in July with the murder of 78-year-old Widdecombe, a former Conservative minister and Reform UK spokeswoman.

Widdecombe was found dead on 9 July at her home in Haytor, Devon, having sustained serious injuries.

She served as Conservative MP for Maidstone and the Weald in Kent for 23 years and was appointed to ministerial roles in Sir John Major's government in the 1990s. She became a member of Reform UK in 2019.

Read more about strikes in the Black Sea.

Get the latest on the Conservative Party conference.

Southampton boss Tonda Eckert is free to continue coaching at the club after receiving a six-week ban - suspended for two years - for his part in the Spygate scandal.

READ MORE: Eckert free to stay as Southampton boss as Spygate ban suspended

More stories from around Scotland.

More on Christa Pike's condition.

Read more on the Oct 7 anniversary.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

More on the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.