URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-duty-proposed-on-imports-of-chinese-rutile-titanium-dioxide
gov.uk Trade Remedies Authority, 7 Oct 2026

The Trade Remedies Authority has published its initial recommendation to impose a new anti-dumping measure on imports of rutile titanium dioxide from China. The TRA has found that rutile titanium dioxide is being dumped into the UK and that there is an imminent threat of injury to the UK industry. 

 Rutile titanium dioxide is widely used as a whitening agent to provide brightness, opacity, and durability in coatings, plastics, paper and many other industrial and consumer products. 

 Findings 

 During its investigation, the TRA found that rutile titanium dioxide is being dumped in the UK. The TRA has determined that there is an imminent threat of injury to the UK production industry. 

 Since the beginning of this investigation, imports of titanium dioxide from China have increased significantly, with the volume imported in May 2026 being over 299% of the volume imported in May 2025 and this trend would be likely to continue if a trade remedy measure were not imposed. 

 The increase in imports and the threat of injury to the UK production industry is due largely to increased Chinese production capacity and to trade remedy measures that have been imposed on titanium dioxide in other jurisdictions, including the European Union, Brazil, India and Saudi Arabia. Measures in these jurisdictions have limited China’s access to these markets and have subsequently increased the attractiveness of export markets currently without protection, such as the UK.  

 TRA Chief Executives Jessica Blakely and Carmen Suarez said: 

 “Our investigation has found that the UK’s titanium dioxide production industry faces a real and immediate threat from dumped imports from China. The measure that we have proposed today will help to protect this key UK industry that employs over 570 people, contributes millions to the country’s economy and supplies hundreds of downstream UK businesses.” 

 The TRA has now published its intended recommendation, proposing that a mixed anti-dumping duty should be applied on titanium dioxide for a period of five years. The rates of such duties would be as follows: 

 
 Cooperating, sampled exporters: 48.29% ad valorum, with a minimum of £0.665 per kg; 
 Cooperating, non-sampled exporters: 48.29% ad valorum, with a minimum of £0.665 per kg; 
 All other overseas exporters: 63.66% ad valorum, with a minimum of £0.876 per kg. 
 

 An ad valorem duty is a measure that is based on a percentage of the value of the goods. In this case, the TRA has proposed a mixed duty – a combination of ad valorem and a specific duty – to maximise the duty’s effectiveness. Which duty applies in this instance depends on which generates the most tariff revenue. Further information on the forms different tariffs take can be found on the TRA’s blog . 

 Interested parties have until 26 October to comment on these initial findings and can do so via the TRA’s Trade Remedies Service . The TRA will then make its final recommendation to the Secretary of State for Business, Innovation, Science and Trade. 

 Background information: 

 
 The Trade Remedies Authority is the UK body that investigates whether new trade remedies are needed to counter unfair import practices and unforeseen surges of imports. 
 The TRA is an arm’s length body of the Department for Business, Innovation, Science and Trade. 
 UK producers who would like to know more about the options available to protect their industry from unfair international trading practices should contact our Advisory Service. Email:  contact@traderemedies.gov.uk 
 
 The period of investigation for this case was 1 January 2025 to 31 December 2025.