URL: https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/french-police-fire-tear-gas-as-more-than-250000-protest-nationwide-for-school-funding
PBS Tue 19:05BST

.st0{fill:#FFFFFF;} .st1{fill:#FFFFFF;}
      
        
        
        
          
            
            
              
              
            
          
        
      
    
















    
      
        
          
        
        
      
    
    
      
        
          
        
        
        
      
    
    
      
        
          .cls-1 { fill: #fff; stroke-width: 0px; }
        
      
      
        
        
         
        
      
    


  
    
    
    
    
    
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
        
        
        
        
        
      
    
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
        
        
        
        
        
      
    
  




    
      
      
      
      
      
    
    
      
    
    
    
      


    

    

        

            

    
        
            
                
                    
                
                Full Episode
            
            
                                                                            
                    
    
    
        
                            
                    
        
            Tuesday, Oct 6
        
    



            

                
                    
                    Close Menu
                

                
                    
                        
                        PBS NewsHour
                    
                

                
                    Episodes
                    Podcasts
                    Newsletters
                

            

            
                
                    
                        The Latest
                    
                
                
                    
                        Politics
                        
                            
                            
                                Brooks and Capehart
                                Politics Monday
                                Supreme Court
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Arts
                        
                            
                            
                                CANVAS
                                Poetry
                                Now Read This
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Nation
                        
                            
                            
                                America at a Crossroads
                                Supreme Court
                                Race Matters
                                Essays
                                Brief But Spectacular
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        World
                        
                            
                            
                                Agents for Change
                                Compass Points
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Economy
                        
                            
                            
                                Making Sen$e
                                Paul Solman
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Science
                        
                            
                            
                                The Leading Edge
                                ScienceScope
                                Basic Research
                                Innovation and Invention
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Health
                        
                            
                            
                                Horizons
                                Long-Term Care
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Education
                        
                            
                            
                                Teachers -->
                                Teachers' Lounge
                                Student Reporting Labs
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    

                    For Teachers
                    
                        
                        
                            Newshour Classroom
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        About
                        
                            
                            Feedback
                            Funders
							 Support
                            Jobs
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Close Menu
            
        

    

    



    
      


          

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

        
    
    PBS News
        
      





  

    
        
            
                
                    
                    
                    
                
                Menu
            
            
                
                    Notifications
                
                
                    Get news alerts from PBS News
                    Turn on desktop notifications?
                    Yes
                    Not now
                
            
        
    

    
    

    
        Full Episodes
        Podcasts
        Newsletters
        Live
    

    
    


  
  

    

      

        
        
                    
            
    

        
    

                        
        
                
        
            
            
                
                
                
            
        

        

                            



        
    

        
        

            By —

            
                
                    Nicolas Garriga, Associated Press
                
                
                    Nicolas Garriga, Associated Press

Oleg Cetinic, Associated Press
                
                
                    Oleg Cetinic, Associated Press

PARIS (AP) — Police fired tear gas to control crowds in Paris and elsewhere in France on Tuesday as more than a quarter of a million people rallied nationwide to support school pupils demanding more education funding, according to government figures. The protests increased pressure on the administration of outgoing President Emmanuel Macron.

As pupils again blockaded high schools, large crowds waving flags and placards gathered in Marseille, Strasbourg and other cities. The demonstrations showed how protests that began at a high school in the Paris region in mid-September have grown into a nationwide movement — the latest of many that have marked Macron's nearly decade-long tenure.

"We need to listen to them," said Léa Monimart, a demonstrator in the northern city of Lille. "They are 17 years old; they are not completely clueless, and they know what they are talking about. It's important to show that there are adults who support them."

The Interior Ministry estimated that 256,000 people took part in demonstrations across the country on Tuesday, including 56,000 in Paris, where small groups of protesters clashed with riot officers at a city square during a largely peaceful march through the city.

The widespread use of arrests, tear gas and riot-control weapons against teenagers is fueling defiance and angering some parents and teachers.

Interior Minister Laurent Nuñez said the police response had been proportionate in "almost all cases" and that the protests had at times turned into riots, requiring police intervention.

French Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu said the government and school leaders must listen to students' concerns and find solutions.

Questioned in parliament on Tuesday about the protest movement, Lecornu denounced "ultra violence" threatening schools. Responding to criticism of police tactics, he pledged that any "accidents" would be investigated and described allegations that the police are racist as a "lie."

More than two weeks of class boycotts and school blockades, and policing that has led to more than 6,100 arrests, mostly of minors, have become a flashpoint in the early days of the presidential election campaign.

Felix Barney, a university student, described the police response as disproportionate, saying it doesn't make "any sense to hit minors."

"Riot police, batons, rubber bullets, tear gas," said Aurélien Le Coq, a lawmaker with the far-left France Unbowed party. Its presidential candidate is strongly backing the protests.

The violence is "absolutely unbearable," Le Coq said.

Nuñez defended police tactics despite a growing number of severe injuries blamed on officers' riot-control weapons. In the latest case, a 15-year-old boy lost a hand Monday in an incident involving a police stun grenade. He said 715 officers had been injured.

READ MORE: Student protests grip France as Prime Minister Lecornu calls crisis meeting

The teenage protesters have struck a chord amid widespread discontent in France. Frustrations extend beyond immediate difficulties, such as fuel prices that have soared because of the Iran war, to broader concerns about constraints on public spending, rising poverty and wealth inequality under Macron, who can't run for a third consecutive term.

Against that backdrop, pupils' complaints that education funding shortfalls are endangering their futures have found a sympathetic audience.

"You say 'young people are the future,' so listen to them," read a handwritten placard attached to a metal barrier outside a Paris school.

At the Hélène Boucher lycée, or high school, in Paris' 20th district, protesters tipped over trash cans and bicycles onto their sides to create a makeshift barricade.

Like hundreds of others around the country, the school was closed. Authorities began shutting schools last week to take some steam out of the demonstrations after widespread damage to schools and mounting injuries among staff, students and police. Classes were totally or partially suspended on Tuesday at 891 schools, according to the Education Ministry.

Facing accusations that it was ignoring protesters, the ministry launched an online portal inviting high school students to anonymously describe the difficulties they face at school and the changes they want to see.

At Hélène Boucher, parents and other adults positioned themselves on Tuesday between protesters and police keeping watch.

"They are our children. Teachers, parents, federations, we all share the same goal: the protection of children's rights, and it is a legitimate right to demonstrate and to make demands," said Emilia Sichili Suriam, who is a member of an association of parents.

Demonstrators have voiced a range of grievances, often centering on a lack of resources and opportunities for students in disadvantaged schools, despite the promise of France's national motto: "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity."

Students have drawn attention to rundown classrooms that lack basics such as desks and chairs, become sweltering in summer without air conditioning and, in some cases, are infested with rats. Other common complaints include staff shortages and exhausting workloads. French high school students' compulsory classroom hours are among the highest in Europe.

Suzanne Nijdam, president of the federation of student associations, vowed that demonstrations would continue until authorities address the complaints.

"So, we really need to act now, and it's in the government's hands, to see these demands through to the end," she said. "It's a matter of political priority, a matter of prioritizing the youth and the future of our country."

John Leicester, Masha Macpherson and Catherine Gaschka in Paris, Mark Carlson in Lille, and Mike Corder in The Hague, Netherlands, contributed to this report.

Support trusted journalism and civil dialogue.

Left:
                Protesters raise their arms as they face off with French CRS riot police at the Place de la Nation during a demonstration by high school and university students, supported by teachers' union and school parents, in Paris as part of a nationwide day of protests and blockades, voicing anger over overcrowded classrooms, teacher shortages and dilapidated school buildings, which students blame on years of underinvestment, France, October 6, 2026. Photo by Abdul Saboor/REUTERS

By Joseph Wilson, Alicia León, Associated Press

By Nicolas Garriga, John Leicester, Associated Press

By Alicia León, Renata Brito, Associated Press

Nicolas Garriga, Associated Press
                
                
                    Nicolas Garriga, Associated Press

Support Provided By:
    Learn more

Subscribe to Here’s the Deal, our politics
                 newsletter for analysis you won’t find anywhere else.

Thank you. Please check your inbox to confirm.

© 1996 - 2026 NewsHour Productions LLC. All Rights Reserved.

PBS is a 501(c)(3) not-for-profit organization.

Subscribe to Here's the Deal with Lisa Desjardins

Support for News Hour Provided By