URL: https://www.npr.org/2026/10/07/g-s1-146776/israel-gaza-oct-7-attack-netanyahu-warning
NPR 10:00BST

Accessibility links   
            Skip to main content
      Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
   


      
         


      
         



    
        
            
                
                    
                    Open Navigation Menu
                
            

            
                
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                    
                      
                        
                      
                      Newsletters
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                
                  
                
                NPR Shop
                
            

            
                
                
                  
                
                Get NPR+
                
            

            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                    Close Navigation Menu
                
            
            
                
                    
                      
                       
                      Home
                      
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          News
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for News
                        
                    

                    
                        National
                        World
                        Politics
                        Business
                        Elections
                        Health
                        Science
                        Climate
                        Race
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Culture
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Culture
                        
                    

                    
                        Books
                        Movies
                        Television
                        Pop Culture
                        Food
                        Art & Design 
                        Performing Arts
                        Life Kit
                        Gaming
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Music
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Music
                        
                    

                    
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    


                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Podcasts & Shows
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    

                    
                        Daily
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Morning Edition
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Saturday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Sunday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    All Things Considered
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Up First
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Here & Now
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    NPR Politics Podcast
                                
                            
                        
                        Featured

                        
    
        
        Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!
    

    
        
        Fresh Air
    

    
        
        Wild Card with Rachel Martin
    

    
        
        It's Been a Minute
    

    
        
        Embedded
    


                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Get NPR+
                                
                            

                            More Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Search
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Newsletters
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          NPR Shop
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                        Get NPR+
                        
                    
                
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                      
                    
                

                
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    

            
        
    
    
        
            
                About NPR
                Diversity
                Support
                Careers
                Press
                Ethics
            
        
    


      Israel marks 3 years since Oct. 7, asking if PM ignored warnings   On the three-year mark since the Hamas-led deadly attack, Israelis are grappling with reports that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was repeatedly warned by regional allies ahead of time.


      
      
      Special Series   Only on NPR







   
      3 years on, Israelis grapple with reports Netanyahu was warned before Oct. 7 attacks
   
   
   




      
            
                  
    
            October 7, 20265:00 AM ET
    

      
      

   
   

   
            
                  
                        
                              By

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu lays a wreath during a state memorial ceremony in memory of those killed in the Oct. 7, 2023, Hamas-led attack on Israel, at Mount Herzl cemetery in Jerusalem on Oct. 5.
                
                    
                    Debbie Hill/Pool UPI via AP
                    
                
                hide caption

TEL AVIV, Israel — As Israel marks three years since Hamas launched its surprise Oct. 7 attacks, Israelis are reeling from new revelations in Israeli and U.S. media that the country had been repeatedly warned by its regional allies that Hamas was planning to attack.

A year since Oct. 7 
            The Israeli village grieving the biggest loss from Oct. 7, one year later
         
         

      
      

   
   

   Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was personally warned about a potential Hamas attack, and his security agencies were notified repeatedly, in the weeks and days leading up to Oct. 7, 2023, four people in the Middle East with direct knowledge of the warnings told NPR.

The Israeli newspaper Haaretz, The New York Times and The Atlantic first reported about the warnings.

Netanyahu has denied he was warned, calling the reports "fake news" and filing a defamation lawsuit last week against Israeli news outlets that published them. He and his defense minister have issued new warnings that Hamas could try to attack or "challenge" Israel on this Oct. 7 memorial day and leading up to national elections later this month.

But the Oct. 7, 2023, security failure — as well as Netanyahu's repeated refusal to take responsibility for it — has become a lightning rod in Israel as the prime minister seeks a new term in national elections this month.

"You didn't protect my son," yelled out one bereaved Israeli father whose son was killed in the Hamas-led attack, as the prime minister spoke at a memorial ceremony this week for the victims.

One warning came directly from the leader of Hamas in Gaza weeks before Oct. 7, a Palestinian mediator told NPR and other media outlets.

Former Palestinian Authority official Sufian Abu Zaida said he helped mediate secret Hamas-Israel talks for more than a year leading up to Oct. 7. He said Hamas wanted Israel to release Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails and offered in exchange to release two living Israeli hostages and the bodies of two Israeli soldiers held in Gaza for years. But he said Israel was unwilling to release as many prisoners as Hamas had demanded.

On Sept. 14, 2023, Abu Zaida said, Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar dictated a message for him to deliver to Israel: "By the end of September, we will put cards on the table. There will be an earthquake in the negotiations, and the Israelis should prepare to empty their prisons."

He did not know what kind of earthquake Sinwar meant, but he said he sent the message to an Israeli intelligence official who acknowledged receiving it and to Mohammed Dahlan, a Palestinian confidant of the leader of the United Arab Emirates.

"What happened [on] the 7th of October is needless," Abu Zaida told NPR.

Days before the Oct. 7 attacks, the leader of the United Arab Emirates, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, called Netanyahu and told him that Hamas' leader in Gaza was planning a big assault against Israel, according to a person close to Dahlan. Dahlan was the Palestinian Authority's head of security in Gaza before Hamas seized control of the territory in 2007.

The Emirati leader told Netanyahu in a phone call that lasted more than 40 minutes that a "quake" would hit the region if no progress was achieved regarding a prisoner deal between Hamas and Israel, the person said.

The person spoke to NPR on condition of anonymity because of the diplomatic sensitivity of the call. The phone call was previously reported by Haaretz and The New York Times.

The UAE did not deny the report, saying only that it maintained dialogue with Israel.

People visit a memorial at a police station attacked by Hamas on Oct. 7, 2023, three years prior, in Sderot, southern Israel, on Oct. 4.
                
                    
                    Oded Balilty/AP
                    
                
                hide caption

A senior Egyptian official told NPR that Egypt had specific intelligence about Hamas movements and that Egypt's head of intelligence at the time, Abbas Kamel, had traveled to Israel with two other senior officials and met with Israel's Mossad and Shin Bet intelligence chiefs.

The official said Kamel relayed a warning that Gaza was on the verge of an "explosion" because of Israel's blockade, the condition of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails and concerns that Israel might move to annex the occupied West Bank.

The official was not authorized to speak publicly and spoke on condition of anonymity. The Atlantic reported that Kamel's visit to Israel was on Sept 26.

Nimrod Novik, a fellow at the Israel Policy Forum think tank and a former top adviser to late Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres, told NPR that he was informed before Oct. 7 by a person with firsthand knowledge that Egypt had delivered warnings to several senior Israeli officials that "Gaza is about to explode in your face."

Novik said one warning was an "urgent and dramatic message" from Egypt, delivered to a person close to Netanyahu some 10 days prior to Oct. 7.

Middle East conflict 
            Skeletons in their clothing: Recovering bodies from the rubble in Gaza
         
         

      
      

   
   

   "I'm certain that the issue of the early warnings on October 7 is going to continue to play with heightened emotions as we approach Election Day," said Novik. "This is going to be an indictment for history, not just for the elections."

Netanyahu has blamed Israeli security organizations for failing to stop the Oct. 7 attacks. He and his government have yet to establish a state commission of inquiry to investigate the failures around Oct. 7, despite public demand.

The new reports about warnings issued to Israel "actually turn the story on its head," pointing the finger right back at the prime minister, said Gayil Talshir, a political scientist at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

"It violates the basic narrative that Netanyahu tries to tell Israelis," said Talshir.

NPR's Aya Batrawy contributed to this report.

NPR does not offer or accept money for coverage or interviews.
                Anyone who makes such an offer or request is not an NPR employee and does not represent NPR.