URL: https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/
CBS 18:10BST

Updated on:  October 7, 2026 / 1:10 PM EDT
            / CBS News

The U.S. Embassy in Saudi Arabia issued a new security alert on Tuesday as the conflict between the Iran-backed Houthis and Saudi-backed Yemeni government forces continues to grow.

"Due to the ongoing security situation in Saudi Arabia and Houthi public threats against airports and airspace across Saudi Arabia, the U.S. Mission reminds all U.S. citizens to exercise heightened vigilance," the embassy said in a statement. "The Houthis have engaged in hostilities against Saudi Arabia, including against civilian airports, and the military conflict has the potential to escalate."

It continued, "U.S. citizens should be aware of potential flight cancellations, airspace closures, and travel disruptions. We recommend checking your flight departure status directly with the airline and with the airport."

U.S. government workers are also prohibited from traveling within 20 miles of the Yemeni border. The embassy advised U.S. citizens should also not travel near the border.

The State Department already had Saudi Arabia rated as Level 3–Reconsider Travel. The country also includes some areas rated at the highest level, Level 4–Do Not Travel. The State Department issued those warnings on Sept. 15.

Iran's army is better prepared than before to confront any renewed attack, according to spokesperson Brig. Gen. Mohammad Akrami-Nia, who told the semi-official Fars news agency that Tehran is prepared to launch preemptive strikes on U.S. positions if necessary.

"We have carried out this type of operation in the recent war," Akrami-Nia said, adding Iran's military doctrine had shifted from a defensive to an offensive one and that such operations were intended to "take the initiative away from them."

According to Akrami-Nia, the army has already targeted U.S. bases prepared for operations against Iran, including with drones. "Therefore, within the framework of preemptive warfare, we have carried out actions and operations," he said.

"Before they could take action, they were struck and came under attack," he continued.

"If necessary, in the future we will carry out preemptive operations to prevent the enemy from carrying out any aggression or attack," he added, saying Iran now has "large stockpiles" of weapons after continued production.

Syria looks set to provide an overland route for Iraqi crude oil to bypass the Strait of Hormuz, the head of Syrian Petroleum Co. has told Bloomberg.

"I expect the export of Iraqi crude via Syria by trucks to start as soon as possible as the deal between both governments is almost done," Yousef Qiblawy, chief executive officer of the state-owned Syrian Petroleum Co., said Wednesday. "So, hopefully, by mid-October the first chain of trucks with crude will come to Syria."

The Iraqi government requested Syria's help to increase crude exports, Qiblawy said.

Iraq already uses around 1,000 trucks daily to transport fuel oil overland to Syria's Mediterranean port city Baniyas, where it is loaded onto tankers for shipment further afield.

"I think there will be at least the same number of trucks with crude as with fuel oil, or even more than 1,000 trucks per day, because the quantity of Iraqi crude is much more than of fuel oil," Qiblawy said.

Maritime tracking firm Kpler said this week that oil exports from the region surpassed pre-war levels last week, while the CEO of Shell said Tuesday that oil flows from the Middle East were back up to around 80% of their pre-war levels.

Much of that boost is thanks to the use of other alternative routes for crude oil to get out of the Persian Gulf, including overland pipelines and U.S. military escorts for vessels using shipping lanes in the Strait of Hormuz that Iran continues to threaten.

Ships have continued to come under attack by both U.S. and Iranian forces in recent weeks, as the warring sides try to enforce their opposing blockades in the strait.

More than 200,000 people in Yemen have been forced to flee from their homes because of the ongoing war between the Iran-backed Houthi rebels and the Saudi-backed Yemeni government, according to the United Nations International Organization for Migration.

"People are running for their lives and finding nowhere safe to go," IOM Director General Amy Pope said in a statement Wednesday. "They need a roof, food and safety today. Our teams are on the ground, but the funding is not. I am asking donors to act now, because every day of delay costs lives. Yemen must not become a forgotten crisis. The world has the means to help. It must use them now."

Many of the displaced have fled their homes since the beginning of September, amid escalating fighting between the Houthis and the Yemeni army. After the Houthis seized control of much of Yemen's southwest Red Sea coast, the government over the weekend announced the start of an offensive to take back all Houthi-held territory, some of which has been in the rebels' possession for over a decade.

Russian President Vladimir Putin will meet Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian Friday in Turkmenistan, according to Iran's official news agency IRNA.

The pair held a phone call Wednesday, according to IRNA, in which Pezeshkian congratulated Putin on his birthday.

During the call, the two presidents also emphasized the continuation and strengthening of bilateral and strategic cooperation between Tehran and Moscow, according to the Iranian state news agency's readout.

Iran's defense ministry said Tuesday that cooperation with Russia, as well as China, had strengthened over the course of the seven-month war, crediting those ties, in part, for a purported boost in Iranian weapons and defense equipment production capacity.

Outgoing Iranian Oil Minister Mohsen Paknejad has rejected President Trump's account of his resignation, saying his departure had nothing to do with the claims the president made about Iran's economy and oil industry.

Speaking to reporters Tuesday, Mr. Trump claimed Paknejad had said, "We have no economy, we have no oil, we have nothing," and said that millions of barrels of oil had passed through the Strait of Hormuz in recent days.

In a statement posted on X on Wednesday, Paknejad said, "My resignation has nothing to do with Trump's claims last night."

Paknejad described himself as "a soldier of the homeland" and said Iran's oil production and exports had continued despite U.S. sanctions and what he described as a blockade. He credited workers in Iran's oil industry with maintaining production and exports under pressure.

"Having suffered a hard blow, it is natural for them to resort to making such false claims," Paknejad said, referring to the president's remarks.

U.S "requests and ideas" about Iran's nuclear program are "at odds with Iran's demands" to end the war, an unnamed senior Iranian official told the Reuters news agency Wednesday, while also indicating some willingness to negotiate the level of enrichment.

Asked about Vice-President JD Vance's comments Tuesday that Tehran must make a "meaningful" reduction of its nuclear enrichment capacity to end the war, appearing to soften the Trump administration's position on the issue, the official said: "Vance's comments are Washington's ideas and requests ... Americans are free to make requests and have ideas, but they are at odds with Iran's demands."

The official, who is involved in indirect negotiations with the U.S., according to Reuters, said there had been no negotiations on Iran's nuclear program and that the U.S. must meet Iran's conditions - which include dropping the blockade of Iranian ports - before the nuclear issue can be addressed.

Iran's right to nuclear enrichment is a red line that Tehran "will not show flexibility on in any way. However, he added that details of enrichment can be discussed later," the official added, referring to Vance, which would appear to leave the door open to negotiations.

Iran will soon block what it calls illegal routes through the Strait of Hormuz, a senior Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps adviser said Wednesday, hours after Secretary of State Marco Rubio said the regime had "lost complete control" of the strategic waterway.

Brig. Gen. Mohammad Reza Naqdi, a senior adviser to the IRGC commander-in-chief, reiterated Iran's stance that the strait is closed and that Iranian armed forces have "full control" over it, adding that the situation would continue until Iran's "legitimate demands" are met.

Earlier Wednesday, Rubio said that Iran had "lost complete control" of the strait and insisted it was open to commercial vessels.

"The Straits of Hormuz are open. There's almost as much oil flowing out now as there was before this conflict began. So they've lost complete control of the straits," Rubio told reporters during a visit to Greece.

Maritime tracking firm Kpler said this week that oil exports from the region surpassed prewar levels last week, despite ongoing attacks on ships in the strait. The CEO of Shell said Tuesday oil flows from the Middle East are back up to around 80% of their prewar levels.

Naqdi acknowledged that some oil was being ushered through the strait against Iran's wishes, but he said the volume was minimal and did not indicate the strait is open.

He claimed oil shipments were getting through using new routes created by unnamed parties clearing paths that were previously unpassable, using explosives, but that such routes would be blocked "in the near future."

Oil prices rose on Wednesday and stocks fell amid fresh concerns about Middle East supplies following a warning that Iran appeared to be stepping up attacks in the Strait of Hormuz.

The retreat came as investors brushed off another record day on Wall Street, where the Nasdaq and S&P 500 were boosted by a rush back into the AI trade.

Confidence has been given a boost as reports said exports from the Middle East – excluding Iran – were pushing back towards pre-war levels. Brent crude oil, the global benchmark, fell below $100 a barrel, and West Texas Intermediate fell below $90, easing inflation concerns and giving central banks some room to hold off hiking interest rates.