URL: https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/saudi-arabia-says-3-injured-in-attacks-on-its-airports-as-fighting-with-houthis-reignites
PBS Tue 19:25BST

.st0{fill:#FFFFFF;} .st1{fill:#FFFFFF;}
      
        
        
        
          
            
            
              
              
            
          
        
      
    
















    
      
        
          
        
        
      
    
    
      
        
          
        
        
        
      
    
    
      
        
          .cls-1 { fill: #fff; stroke-width: 0px; }
        
      
      
        
        
         
        
      
    


  
    
    
    
    
    
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
        
        
        
        
        
      
    
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
        
        
        
        
        
      
    
  




    
      
      
      
      
      
    
    
      
    
    
    
      


    

    

        

            

    
        
            
                
                    
                
                Full Episode
            
            
                                                                            
                    
    
    
        
                            
                    
        
            Tuesday, Oct 6
        
    



            

                
                    
                    Close Menu
                

                
                    
                        
                        PBS NewsHour
                    
                

                
                    Episodes
                    Podcasts
                    Newsletters
                

            

            
                
                    
                        The Latest
                    
                
                
                    
                        Politics
                        
                            
                            
                                Brooks and Capehart
                                Politics Monday
                                Supreme Court
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Arts
                        
                            
                            
                                CANVAS
                                Poetry
                                Now Read This
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Nation
                        
                            
                            
                                America at a Crossroads
                                Supreme Court
                                Race Matters
                                Essays
                                Brief But Spectacular
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        World
                        
                            
                            
                                Agents for Change
                                Compass Points
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Economy
                        
                            
                            
                                Making Sen$e
                                Paul Solman
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Science
                        
                            
                            
                                The Leading Edge
                                ScienceScope
                                Basic Research
                                Innovation and Invention
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Health
                        
                            
                            
                                Horizons
                                Long-Term Care
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Education
                        
                            
                            
                                Teachers -->
                                Teachers' Lounge
                                Student Reporting Labs
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    

                    For Teachers
                    
                        
                        
                            Newshour Classroom
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        About
                        
                            
                            Feedback
                            Funders
							 Support
                            Jobs
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Close Menu
            
        

    

    



    
      


          

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

        
    
    PBS News
        
      





  

    
        
            
                
                    
                    
                    
                
                Menu
            
            
                
                    Notifications
                
                
                    Get news alerts from PBS News
                    Turn on desktop notifications?
                    Yes
                    Not now
                
            
        
    

    
    

    
        Full Episodes
        Podcasts
        Newsletters
        Live
    

    
    


  
  

    

      

        
        
                    
            
    

        
    

                        
        
                
        
            
            
                
                
                
            
        

        

                            



        
    

        
        

            By —

            
                
                    Associated Press
                
                
                    Associated Press

Saudi Arabia said three people were injured in the latest attacks on its airports since fighting with Yemen's Houthi rebels reignited. Meanwhile, Palestinian officials said Israeli airstrikes in Gaza City killed two people, while condemning home demolitions in east Jerusalem and violence in the occupied West Bank.

Israelis are readying to mark the third anniversary of the Palestinian militant Hamas group's Oct. 7, 2023 attack as conflict in the Middle East has spread to include Iran, Lebanon, Syria and Yemen.

Here is the latest news from the Middle East on Tuesday. Full coverage is available here.

Saudi Arabia's General Authority of Civil Aviation said airports in the cities of Najran and Jizan were hit on Monday, damaging both facilities and leaving three lightly injured. The statement didn't say who was responsible, but followed an announcement by Yemen's Iran-backed Houthi rebels that they fired missiles and drones at the kingdom.

Houthi Brig. Gen. Yahya Saree said in a statement on Tuesday they had fired toward a third airport on Tuesday. The Associated Press could not confirm whether the Houthis had hit Abha International Airport. Saudi authorities did not immediately comment.

The Saudi-led coalition fighting in Yemen said Tuesday it intercepted and destroyed a ballistic missile launched by the Iran-backed Houthis toward Khamis Mushait, a city in southwestern Saudi Arabia that's home to a major Saudi military base.

The Houthis were fighting Tuesday around Dhubab, a strategic town in Yemen that its internationally recognized government had previously said it had retaken, a senior Yemeni military official told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak to reporters.

READ MORE: Saudi-backed coalition forces Houthis from several areas around key strait, Yemeni officials say

Saudi Arabia and its allies in Yemen's government have launched a military campaign to reclaim Houthi-controlled territory near the southern tip of the Red Sea to prevent disruptions to oil being exported out of the region.

By Ahmed al Haj in Aden, Yemen.

An outbound tanker transiting the Strait of Hormuz was struck by an "unknown projectile" on Monday, the British military said in a late report Tuesday. There were no immediate reports of casualties or environmental impact.

Even as Iran has lost its near-complete chokehold on the strait, the ongoing risk of Iranian attacks keeps overall ship traffic well below prewar levels.

Two Israeli airstrikes killed two people in Gaza City, health officials at the city's Shifa Hospital said. Israel's military said it targeted militants in both strikes.

It was the latest deadly attack since a ceasefire took effect nearly a year ago in the Israel-Hamas war triggered by the 2023 attack, when Hamas-led militants killed 1,200 people, most civilians, in southern Israel and abducted 251 others. More than 1,460 Palestinians have been killed since the ceasefire, according to Gaza's Health Ministry. The ministry, part of the Hamas-run government, maintains detailed records and is seen as generally reliable by U.N. agencies and independent experts. It does not distinguish between civilians and militants in its toll but says women and children make up around half the dead.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said at a Cabinet meeting on Tuesday that Hamas could attack Israel in a bid to influence the outcome of the country's elections later this month. Netanyahu, who is locked in a tough battle for re-election, did not publicly provide evidence for the claim.

In recent days, Netanyahu's political opponents have pointed to the thwarted FlyDubai cockpit attack as the latest example of his government's failure to manage security threats.

Jaafar Ishtyeh, a veteran Palestinian photojournalist for Agence France-Presse, said he was filming the olive harvest in the West Bank village of Aqraba when he heard shooting by Israeli settlers. He said they later encircled him, took his camera as he was filming the attack and beat him, causing injuries that required hospitalization.

The Palestinian Authority said settlers in the area also shot one man in the leg and severely beat two others in the town south of Nablus. Israel's military did not provide immediate comment on the attack.

The attack was the latest this harvest season, during which four Palestinians have been killed and more than 100 injured, according to Palestinian officials.

Israeli authorities tore down a five-story building in east Jerusalem on Tuesday.

National Security Minister Itamar Ben Gvir attended the demolition and said that Israeli authorities had demolished more than 10,000 structures built without permits over the past year and a half.

Palestinians say the process of procuring construction permits is nearly impossible for them in east Jerusalem, which Israel annexed in the 1967 Mideast war and is home to almost 400,000 Palestinians.

This report will be updated throughout the day as new developments emerge.

Support trusted journalism and civil dialogue.

Left:
                Pro-Saudi-backed Yemeni government fighters fire their weapons during what government forces say was an advance against the Iran-backed Houthis, near Dhubab, Taiz Governorate, Yemen, in this still image taken from video released October 5, 2026. Southern Giants Brigades/Handout via REUTERS

By Menelaos Hadjicostis, Associated Press

By Jill Lawless, Associated Press

Associated Press
                
                
                    Associated Press

Support Provided By:
    Learn more

Subscribe to Here’s the Deal, our politics
                 newsletter for analysis you won’t find anywhere else.

Thank you. Please check your inbox to confirm.

© 1996 - 2026 NewsHour Productions LLC. All Rights Reserved.

PBS is a 501(c)(3) not-for-profit organization.

Subscribe to Here's the Deal with Lisa Desjardins

Support for News Hour Provided By