URL: https://www.npr.org/2026/10/07/nx-s1-5992704/investigation-continues-into-whether-u-k-air-base-incident-is-linked-to-iran
NPR 11:45BST

Accessibility links   
            Skip to main content
      Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
   


      
         


      
         



    
        
            
                
                    
                    Open Navigation Menu
                
            

            
                
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                    
                      
                        
                      
                      Newsletters
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                
                  
                
                NPR Shop
                
            

            
                
                
                  
                
                Get NPR+
                
            

            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                    Close Navigation Menu
                
            
            
                
                    
                      
                       
                      Home
                      
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          News
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for News
                        
                    

                    
                        National
                        World
                        Politics
                        Business
                        Elections
                        Health
                        Science
                        Climate
                        Race
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Culture
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Culture
                        
                    

                    
                        Books
                        Movies
                        Television
                        Pop Culture
                        Food
                        Art & Design 
                        Performing Arts
                        Life Kit
                        Gaming
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Music
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Music
                        
                    

                    
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    


                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Podcasts & Shows
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    

                    
                        Daily
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Morning Edition
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Saturday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Sunday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    All Things Considered
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Up First
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Here & Now
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    NPR Politics Podcast
                                
                            
                        
                        Featured

                        
    
        
        Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!
    

    
        
        Fresh Air
    

    
        
        Wild Card with Rachel Martin
    

    
        
        It's Been a Minute
    

    
        
        Embedded
    


                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Get NPR+
                                
                            

                            More Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Search
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Newsletters
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          NPR Shop
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                        Get NPR+
                        
                    
                
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                      
                    
                

                
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    

            
        
    
    
        
            
                About NPR
                Diversity
                Support
                Careers
                Press
                Ethics
            
        
    


      Investigation continues into whether U.K. air base incident is linked to Iran   Questions continue to swirl around a U.K. military base and potential Iran-backed attacks.


         

    
        World
    


      Investigation continues into whether U.K. air base incident is linked to Iran
   
   
   




      
            
                  
    
            October 7, 20266:45 AM ET
    
         
                        Heard on             Morning Edition
         
         

      
      

   
   

   
            
                  
                        
                              By

Questions continue to swirl around a U.K. military base and potential Iran-backed attacks.

MICHEL MARTIN, HOST:  We have new information about events connected to the British air base used by American bombers near where five men were arrested last week in a suspected terror plot.A MARTÍNEZ, HOST:  All the U.S. long-range bombers that were at that base were brought home over the weekend because of a threat of a possible attack by Iran.MARTIN: For the latest, we're joined by NPR national security correspondent Greg Myre. Greg, good morning.GREG MYRE, BYLINE: Hi, Michel.MARTIN: Do we know what kind of threat Iran was posing?MYRE: Yeah. A U.S. official - who's not authorized to speak publicly - told NPR a credible threat linked to Iran was the reason the U.S. decided to abruptly remove a dozen B-1 bombers from this Royal Air Force base, Fairford, in the southwest part of the country. This threat potentially involved a drone attack. The U.S. planes were flown out Sunday. They've returned to home bases in the U.S. And these are long-range bombers that were part of a larger contingent of U.S. war planes that used this British base in recent months to carry out airstrikes in Iran. The other planes had already left.MARTIN: And as we mentioned, this all began last week. Are there any updates on that investigation in Britain?MYRE: Yeah. One more man was arrested Tuesday. He was the seventh to be picked up since this all began on September 27. That's when British police arrested five young men traveling in white vans near the air base in a rural area in the middle of the night. Now, no weapons were found in the vans, and a few days after that, a sixth man was detained, but they've all been released on bail, and no one has been charged at this point.Now, President Trump and Britain's prime minister, Andy Burnham, have both said there's a possible link to Iran, but they haven't provided details. Iran, for its part, has denied any involvement.MARTIN: So it sounds like there's still a lot that we want to know. But have we seen anything similar in the past?MYRE: You know, Michel, last year, Ukraine smuggled drones into Russia. It hid them inside small mobile homes on the back of trucks that parked near several Russian air bases with long-range bombers. And then by remote control, Ukraine launched the drones that hit the Russians' planes. Twenty to 40 of them were damaged or destroyed. This was a significant portion of Russia's long-range bomber fleet, and this attack certainly grabbed the attention of the U.S., which realized U.S. planes could also be vulnerable to a similar surprise attack.MARTIN: So are U.S. military bases at home and abroad now considered more vulnerable than in the past?MYRE: Absolutely, yes. The war with Iran has driven this home in multiple ways. Iranian drones and missiles have hit U.S. bases throughout the Middle East. Perhaps the most serious attack was on the very large U.S. naval base in Bahrain. And so for the past three decades, the U.S. has built many bases in the region. The idea was to provide some level of protections for U.S. allies there.MARTIN: So is the U.S. rethinking this arrangement?MYRE: Yeah, absolutely. The drone threat has really flipped the thinking in many ways. The U.S. has a constellation of military bases that all have to be defended, and this is very complicated and expensive. You know, this discussion was already taking place about the possible future arrangement for U.S. bases in the Middle East. And now we're learning that U.S. planes operating in Britain were facing some sort of threat as well. And just a quick reminder - the U.S. has hundreds of military bases outside the U.S. Now all of them have to worry about drone attacks.MARTIN: That is NPR's Greg Myre. Greg, thank you.MYRE: Sure thing, Michel.

Copyright © 2026 NPR.  All rights reserved.  Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

Accuracy and availability of NPR transcripts may vary. Transcript text may be revised to correct errors or match updates to audio. Audio on npr.org may be edited after its original broadcast or publication. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.

NPR does not offer or accept money for coverage or interviews.
                Anyone who makes such an offer or request is not an NPR employee and does not represent NPR.