URL: https://www.npr.org/2026/10/07/g-s1-146853/up-first-newsletter-long-range-bombers-france-high-school-protest-germany-august-hanning-oct-7-memorial-day
NPR 11:52BST

Accessibility links   
            Skip to main content
      Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
   


      
         


      
         



    
        
            
                
                    
                    Open Navigation Menu
                
            

            
                
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                    
                      
                        
                      
                      Newsletters
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                
                  
                
                NPR Shop
                
            

            
                
                
                  
                
                Get NPR+
                
            

            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                    Close Navigation Menu
                
            
            
                
                    
                      
                       
                      Home
                      
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          News
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for News
                        
                    

                    
                        National
                        World
                        Politics
                        Business
                        Elections
                        Health
                        Science
                        Climate
                        Race
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Culture
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Culture
                        
                    

                    
                        Books
                        Movies
                        Television
                        Pop Culture
                        Food
                        Art & Design 
                        Performing Arts
                        Life Kit
                        Gaming
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Music
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Music
                        
                    

                    
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    


                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Podcasts & Shows
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    

                    
                        Daily
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Morning Edition
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Saturday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Sunday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    All Things Considered
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Up First
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Here & Now
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    NPR Politics Podcast
                                
                            
                        
                        Featured

                        
    
        
        Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!
    

    
        
        Fresh Air
    

    
        
        Wild Card with Rachel Martin
    

    
        
        It's Been a Minute
    

    
        
        Embedded
    


                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Get NPR+
                                
                            

                            More Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Search
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Newsletters
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          NPR Shop
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                        Get NPR+
                        
                    
                
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                      
                    
                

                
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    

            
        
    
    
        
            
                About NPR
                Diversity
                Support
                Careers
                Press
                Ethics
            
        
    


      Up First briefing: U.K. base; France's schools; August Hanning; Oct. 7   A possible Iranian threat led the U.S. to remove long-range bombers from a U.K. base. And, Israelis are learning that their prime minister may have been warned before the Oct. 7 attacks.


      
      
      Special Series   Up First Newsletter








      
            
                        All Up First Stories    Up First Podcast    Morning Edition  
      
      

   

   
    
        
            
            
            
        


    
        
        


    



    
      
      
        
          LISTEN & FOLLOW
            
            
            
          
        

        
          
              
                  
                      
                        
                          
                            
                          
                          NPR App
                      
                        
                          
                            
                          
                          Apple Podcasts
                      
                          
                          
                            
                          
                          Spotify
                      
                        
                          
                          
                        
                        Amazon Music
                      
                        
                          
                            
                          
                        iHeart Radio
                      
                      
                      
                        
                          
                            
                          
                          RSS link
                  
              

              
                Sign up for the [TITLE] Newsletter
                
              

              
                Get perks with [Podcast Title]+
                Your support helps make our show possible and unlocks access to our sponsor-free feed.

Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter. Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox, and listen to the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.

New information reveals that, over the weekend, the U.S. removed all long-range bombers from the British air base near where five men were arrested last week in a suspected terror plot. A U.S. official who is not authorized to speak publicly told NPR that the decision to abruptly send home a dozen B-1 bombers from Royal Air Force base Fairford was due to a "credible threat" from Iran, which potentially involved a drone attack.

F15's maneuver at RAF Lakenheath on Sept. 28, 2026, in Lakenheath, England.
                
                    
                    Dan Kitwood/Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

High school students in France are blocking schools today, after hundreds of thousands of them marched across the country yesterday. They are joined by teachers, parents and labor union members. The movement, which began in a particularly run-down high school facing teacher absenteeism, aims to improve learning conditions and address inequalities in the French education system.

A former head of Germany's foreign intelligence agency will appear before a federal judge today to face charges of espionage and attempted treason. Federal prosecutors accuse August Hanning of using classified information to brief a foreign intelligence agency. He served as the head of Germany's CIA equivalent for seven years from 1998 to 2005. Prosecutors allege he shared sensitive political information for 12 years after leaving office. They have not yet disclosed who Hanning's alleged clients were.

As Israel marks three years since Hamas' surprise Oct. 7 attacks, new reports in Israeli and U.S. media say regional allies warned Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that Hamas was planning to attack. Four people in the Middle East with direct knowledge of the warnings told NPR that Netanyahu was personally informed about the potential attacks and his security agencies were notified multiple times in the weeks and days leading up to Oct. 7, 2023. Netanyahu has denied this, labeling the reports "fake news" and recently filing a defamation lawsuit against the news outlets that first published the information. He and his defense minister now warn that Hamas might attempt to attack again on this Oct. 7 memorial day and leading up to Israel's national elections later this month.

Malte Mueller/Getty Images
        
    

   
   Living Better is a special series about what it takes to stay healthy in America.

Parental monitoring plays a key role in shielding kids from the dangers of social media and excessive screen time. Parents can empower their children to navigate the digital world confidently and safely by establishing clear boundaries early and having open conversations about online habits. Here are some ways guardians can help their kids use their devices more safely:

NPR
        
    

   
   The results of the 2026 midterm elections will shape the final two years of President Trump's second term and serve as a precursor to the 2028 general election. This month, Morning Edition is reporting from six states that could change the balance of power in Washington.

Morning Edition's Leila Fadel traveled to the battleground state of Maine to discover what issues are energizing voters. Maine residents could play a crucial role in deciding which political party controls the Senate. One of the most significant U.S. Senate races features Republican incumbent Susan Collins, who is seeking re-election against Democrat Troy Jackson. The race has been closely watched, especially after Jackson was nominated by the Maine Democratic Party after Graham Platner withdrew because of a sexual assault allegation. Listen to what has been happening in that contest.

Fadel was also on the ground with residents, figuring out what they cared about. Hear more about:

Follow the reporting: Texas coverage airs Oct. 13, followed by reporting from North Carolina and Georgia, and Ohio and Michigan. You can follow along on Morning Edition, NPR.org, in the NPR app and in the Up First newsletter.

NPR
        
    

   
   The 2026 National Book Awards finalists are here, showcasing a diverse range of literary works, from nonfiction on the prison system to a novel about a patient navigator at a gender-affirming care center.Avengers: Endgame has reclaimed the number one position on Hollywood's all-time worldwide box office chart following its recent re-release in cinemas. It first became the highest-grossing film in history in 2019.Karl Deisseroth, Peter Hegemann and Georg Nagel have earned the 2026 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for their contributions to optogenetics, a field of neuroscience that examines the links between neuron activity and specific behaviors. Soon after learning of his win, Deisseroth spoke with Here & Now. (via WBUR)   
    Sponsor Message

    
      
      
    


    

   This newsletter was edited by Suzanne Nuyen.

NPR does not offer or accept money for coverage or interviews.
                Anyone who makes such an offer or request is not an NPR employee and does not represent NPR.