URL: https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/suspected-iranian-drone-plot-pushed-u-s-to-evacuate-bombers-from-british-airbase
PBS Tue 23:50BST

.st0{fill:#FFFFFF;} .st1{fill:#FFFFFF;}
      
        
        
        
          
            
            
              
              
            
          
        
      
    
















    
      
        
          
        
        
      
    
    
      
        
          
        
        
        
      
    
    
      
        
          .cls-1 { fill: #fff; stroke-width: 0px; }
        
      
      
        
        
         
        
      
    


  
    
    
    
    
    
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
        
        
        
        
        
      
    
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
        
        
        
        
        
      
    
  




    
      
      
      
      
      
    
    
      
    
    
    
      


    

    

        

            

    
        
            
                
                    
                
                Full Episode
            
            
                                                                            
                    
    
    
        
                            
                    
        
            Tuesday, Oct 6
        
    



            

                
                    
                    Close Menu
                

                
                    
                        
                        PBS NewsHour
                    
                

                
                    Episodes
                    Podcasts
                    Newsletters
                

            

            
                
                    
                        The Latest
                    
                
                
                    
                        Politics
                        
                            
                            
                                Brooks and Capehart
                                Politics Monday
                                Supreme Court
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Arts
                        
                            
                            
                                CANVAS
                                Poetry
                                Now Read This
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Nation
                        
                            
                            
                                America at a Crossroads
                                Supreme Court
                                Race Matters
                                Essays
                                Brief But Spectacular
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        World
                        
                            
                            
                                Agents for Change
                                Compass Points
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Economy
                        
                            
                            
                                Making Sen$e
                                Paul Solman
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Science
                        
                            
                            
                                The Leading Edge
                                ScienceScope
                                Basic Research
                                Innovation and Invention
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Health
                        
                            
                            
                                Horizons
                                Long-Term Care
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Education
                        
                            
                            
                                Teachers -->
                                Teachers' Lounge
                                Student Reporting Labs
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    

                    For Teachers
                    
                        
                        
                            Newshour Classroom
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        About
                        
                            
                            Feedback
                            Funders
							 Support
                            Jobs
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Close Menu
            
        

    

    



    
        


          

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

        
    
    PBS News
        
            





  

    
        
            
                
                    
                    
                    
                
                Menu
            
            
                
                    Notifications
                
                
                    Get news alerts from PBS News
                    Turn on desktop notifications?
                    Yes
                    Not now
                
            
        
    

    
    

    
        Full Episodes
        Podcasts
        Newsletters
        Live
    

    
    


    
    

        

            
    

        

                        
                
                    
                
            
            
            
                                
                Suspected Iranian drone plot pushed U.S. to evacuate bombers from British air base
                Oct 6, 2026 6:50 PM EDT
            

        

        

    

    


            
                
    

    

                    



        
    

                
            
        
        
        

            By —

            
                
                    Geoff Bennett
                
                
                    Geoff Bennett

Nick Schifrin
                
                
                    Nick Schifrin

British police arrested a 22-year-old on suspicion of terrorism offenses connected to a possible plot against the RAF Fairford air base. Over the weekend, the U.S. Air Force evacuated bombers from that base, for fear of an attack. Nick Schifrin reports.

Notice: Transcripts are machine and human generated and lightly edited for accuracy. They may contain errors.

Today, British police arrested a 22-year-old on suspicion of Terrorism offenses connected to a possible plot against the British air base at Fairford.

Over the weekend, the U.S. Air Force evacuated bombers from that base for fear of an attack.

Nick Schifrin has been following all of this and joins us now.

So, Nick, based on your reporting, what more do you know about this latest arrest?

Geoff, this was the seventh arrest, but a senior British official points it out to me that this was the first arrest in one week, meaning it was the result of Britain's counterterrorism investigation, rather than the rushed initial police response.

And it was last Sunday when we saw police arrest five men on the suspicion of terrorism, who were subsequently released on bail. They didn't have any weapons or explosives, although they did have gasoline, leading some officials to suggest to me it was a dry run or perhaps a diversion.

But a U.S. official tells me that, even before that arrest, the U.S. was informed of a possible -- quote -- "imminent attack." The base went on lockdown and families were moved. Since then, British and American officials have said to me and in public that this was an Iranian-backed attack on the base from which U.S. B-1 bombers have attacked Iran.

And the U.S. evacuated those bombers over the weekend. You see some of the bombers leaving Fairford right there. A U.S. official points out the bombers were so close to the fence, you could practically throw a rock at them. And we heard yesterday from Vice President Vance and President Trump acknowledging Iran's connection and delivering a new threat.

J.D. Vance, Vice President of the United States: We do feel with some confidence that the Iranians are -- they're trying to do what the Iranian state has done for 49 years, which is engage in acts of terrorism against the United States.

And we actually know the people that made the threat, and they got themselves with a big problem.

And, today, those bombers are back in the U.S., Geoff, from which they have attacked Iran in the past.

And, Nick, what more is known about the threat that was posed?

So, a senior British official tells me that one of the threats was a possible drone attack. Now, that's a threat that American officials have acknowledged even in the United States at U.S. bases in the U.S., simply because the war in Ukraine has proven that drones are so cheap and so easily can deliver explosives.

And in this case, there is a direct precedent. It was in June 2025 that Ukraine launched an audacious attack with more than 100 drones that had been hiding inside Russian shipping containers. And you see there, Ukraine says it destroyed 40 Russian bombers on four military bases thousands of miles from Ukraine's border.

Vice President Vance said yesterday that the moving of the bombers was -- quote -- "out of an abundance of caution." But American and British authorities have been warning about Iranian attacks on Britain, on the United States for years.

The head of Britain's domestic spy agency, MI5, Ken McCallum, last summer said the U.K. had responded to 20 Iranian-backed plots in the previous three years. And a senior British official tells me tonight, Geoff, that the counterterrorism operations against Iranian-backed plots have been going for years and are ongoing today.

Nick Schifrin, our thanks to you, as always.

By Konstantin Toropin, Associated Press

By Alastair Grant, Jill Lawless, Associated Press

Geoff Bennett
                
                
                    Geoff Bennett

Geoff Bennett is co-anchor and co-managing editor of PBS News Hour, where he brings incisive reporting and sharp analysis to the political and cultural forces shaping American life.

Nick Schifrin is PBS News Hour’s Foreign Affairs and Defense Correspondent and serves as the host of Compass Points from PBS News.

Support Provided By:
    Learn more

Subscribe to Here’s the Deal, our politics
                 newsletter for analysis you won’t find anywhere else.

Thank you. Please check your inbox to confirm.

© 1996 - 2026 NewsHour Productions LLC. All Rights Reserved.

PBS is a 501(c)(3) not-for-profit organization.

Subscribe to Here's the Deal with Lisa Desjardins

Support for News Hour Provided By