URL: https://www.npr.org/2026/10/07/g-s1-146541/fertilizer-diy-farmers-iran-war
NPR 14:32BST

Accessibility links   
            Skip to main content
      Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
   


      
         


      
         



    
        
            
                
                    
                    Open Navigation Menu
                
            

            
                
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                    
                      
                        
                      
                      Newsletters
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                
                  
                
                NPR Shop
                
            

            
                
                
                  
                
                Get NPR+
                
            

            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                    Close Navigation Menu
                
            
            
                
                    
                      
                       
                      Home
                      
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          News
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for News
                        
                    

                    
                        National
                        World
                        Politics
                        Business
                        Elections
                        Health
                        Science
                        Climate
                        Race
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Culture
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Culture
                        
                    

                    
                        Books
                        Movies
                        Television
                        Pop Culture
                        Food
                        Art & Design 
                        Performing Arts
                        Life Kit
                        Gaming
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Music
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Music
                        
                    

                    
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    


                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Podcasts & Shows
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    

                    
                        Daily
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Morning Edition
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Saturday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Sunday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    All Things Considered
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Up First
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Here & Now
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    NPR Politics Podcast
                                
                            
                        
                        Featured

                        
    
        
        Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!
    

    
        
        Fresh Air
    

    
        
        Wild Card with Rachel Martin
    

    
        
        It's Been a Minute
    

    
        
        Embedded
    


                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Get NPR+
                                
                            

                            More Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Search
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Newsletters
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          NPR Shop
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                        Get NPR+
                        
                    
                
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                      
                    
                

                
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    

            
        
    
    
        
            
                About NPR
                Diversity
                Support
                Careers
                Press
                Ethics
            
        
    


      DIY fertilizer is a blessing for cash-strapped farmers    It's hard enough being a small-scale farmer. Then the Iran war drove up fertilizer prices. So farmers are using a traditional Asian recipe to make their own. They call it a "labor of love."


         

    
        Global Health
    


      DIY fertilizer is a blessing as farmers face steep prices due to the Iran war
   
   
   




      
            
                  
    
            October 7, 20269:32 AM ET
    

      
      

   
   

   
            
                  
                        
                              By

At a market in Zambia, organic vegetables share table space with bags of homemade bokashi fertilizer that sell for about $2.50 each.
                
                    
                    Andy Higgins for NPR
                    
                
                hide caption

On 12 acres outside of Lusaka, Kanangwa Newlove has built a paradise.

Shady fruit trees dot her fields. During the growing season, long tomato vines drape over trellises. There are tidy rows of corn, pumpkins and a local leafy green called blackjack. Eleven varieties of lettuce.

"I started taking vegetables to my workmates, and before I knew it I was supplying the supermarket," Newlove says. "It went on and on."

For many farmers, 2026 has been a challenging year. The Iran war choked off the Strait of Hormuz and dramatically halted international trade shipments — including fertilizers. Prices spiked globally. The effects were quickly felt in African countries, where smallholder farmers are often vulnerable to rapid changes in fertilizer costs.''

Newlove, however, didn't feel the pinch. For years, she's fertilized her plants with a homemade, fermented compost known as bokashi.

Kanangwa Newlove (right), the founder of Loctaguna Organics, and her team harvest organic vegetables. She also makes fertilizer known as bokashi.
                
                    
                    Andy Higgins for NPR
                    
                
                hide caption

Global Health 
            Photos: This may be the most inspirational night school on Earth
         
         

      
      

   
   

   A solution from ancient Asia   With roots in ancient Korean farming traditions and popularized in Japan, bokashi is relatively easy to make. According to Newlove, it's also highly effective.

"We could now have a potent fertilizer —– organic —– which is ready in [weeks]. For us that was amazing," Newlove says. "It was a game changer, to be honest."

Bokashi has become so popular in Zambia, she says, that farmers now sell homemade bokashi compost at markets and swap tips on social media. The Kasisi Agricultural Training Centre offers bokashi training and often sends students to her farm to see it in action.

"[Zambian farmers] have been looking for alternatives — how to grow food but reduce costs," says Rabecca Mwila of the Knowledge Platform for Organic Agriculture and Agroecology in Africa. "Inputs such as bokashi have come in to provide a cushion for them."

For home composters, bokashi is a method of fermenting food scraps in an anaerobic environment — no oxygen allowed! But many farmers make a version of bokashi outdoors. Ingredients are often easy to find on a farm: leaves or crop residues, animal dung, charcoal and ash from a fireplace. Then, they add yeast and a source of sugar (molasses or bananas, in a pinch) to jump start the fermentation process. The mixture heats up as microbes break it down.

After a couple of weeks of fermentation, the concoction is buried underground near Newlove's crops, so it can break down completely.

Plant matter, animal dung, ash, molasses or a banana and a pinch of yeast are ingredients that ferment to yield a bucket of bokashi fertilizer.
                
                    
                    Andy Higgins for NPR
                    
                
                hide caption

"There's a lot of excitement from farmers because they've been able to testify that it's cheaper for them, and their soil is rebuilding," Mwila says. "They're able to see earthworms."

As climate change makes rainfall less predictable and dry seasons longer, Mwila says farmers are increasingly interested in inexpensive, sustainable options.

Many voice concerns about the longer-term impact of commercial fertilizers. "Because of the overuse of synthetic fertilizers and pesticides and herbicides, the soil is completely depleted," says Mwila.

Zambia once imported nearly all of its fertilizer. After global prices tripled following the COVID-19 pandemic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine, finding alternatives became a matter of food security.

In addition to bokashi, the Zambian government has promoted the growth of its domestic fertilizer industry. Last week, a Chinese-Zambian conglomerate announced its intention to build a $1.5 billion fertilizer plant in the country.

Although global fertilizer prices largely dropped over the summer, including in Zambia, some fertilizers remain expensive in southern African countries, including Malawi, Tanzania and South Africa.

While the government subsidizes fertilizer, there isn't always enough to go around. Donald Zulu, a lecturer and researcher at Copperbelt University in northern Zambia, says that without subsidies — a farmer will pay about $400 USD to buy enough fertilizer to grow 2.5 acres of corn.

"It's quite expensive and out of reach for many smallholder farmers," Zulu says.

Seeking an alternative, he started working with WeForest and local farmers to study how well bokashi worked on corn and cabbage in 2024.

"The results were very encouraging," Zulu says. "Bokashi echoed the yields of mineral fertilizer."

This suggested that small-scale farmers could use bokashi — which is cheaper — and grow a comparable amount of food. But to his surprise, the best-performing crops were planted with smaller amounts of both bokashi and mineral fertilizers.

Kanangwa Newlove makes her own fertilizer, called bokashi. "Even when you're making it, you don't need to wear a mask because it's not toxic. There's no harmful chemicals," Newlove says. "So it's all just like a labor of love."
                
                    
                    Andy Higgins for NPR
                    
                
                hide caption

"That's where bokashi becomes key in terms of helping farmers to be food secure," he said.

For farmers like Kanangwa Newlove, bokashi is less about the cost, and more about building a sustainable farming practice that preserves the land.

"Even when you're making it, you don't need to wear a mask because it's not toxic. There's no harmful chemicals," Newlove says. "So it's all just like a labor of love."

For stories about life in our changing world, subscribe to NPR's Global Health newsletter.

NPR does not offer or accept money for coverage or interviews.
                Anyone who makes such an offer or request is not an NPR employee and does not represent NPR.