URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cqd09g0gj50ko
BBC 17:48

Canada suspends plans to expand assisted dying to people with mental illness

Justice Minister Sean Fraser said the decision to pause the expansion was a difficult one

Canada says it will indefinitely suspend plans to expand its medically assisted dying law to people whose sole condition is mental illness, citing a lack of consensus on who would be eligible.

It comes after a parliamentary panel earlier this year recommended that medically assisted dying - known as Maid in Canada - should not be expanded.

On Wednesday, Canada's justice minister, Sean Fraser, said that \"while there is not a perfect consensus on this issue, we believe this is the correct approach at this particular time\".

Supporters of extending the programme to those with mental illness alone argue that not doing so violates their constitutional rights and access to healthcare.

A federal case remains before the courts challenging the government's earlier decision to delay access to Maid for people with mental illness.

Fraser acknowledged this is an issue that the Supreme Court could weigh on in the future.

Wednesday's announcement means that Canadians with mental illness as their sole condition will not be able to access assisted dying by March 2027 as previously planned.

The government will instead introduce a new law in the coming weeks that suspends that expansion indefinitely, Fraser said.

That proposed legislation will also to allow patients who have a progressing incurable illness to consent to assisted dying before their health deteriorates to the point where they are unable to do so. Advanced requests are not currently legal.

\"These are not easy decisions but we believe they will be the correct ones,\" Fraser said.

Medically assisted dying became legal in Canada in 2016 for people with terminal illnesses, who still account for the vast majority of cases.

Following a court case in Quebec, it was expanded in 2021 to people with incurable conditions but whose death was not imminent. In Canada, that mechanism is known as \"track two\" Maid.

Canada was first set to expand its assisted dying laws to people whose sole condition is mental illness in 2023, but it delayed doing so twice to allow for time to study its potential delivery.

Advocates for expanding assisted dying to people with mental illness alone say they should have the same rights as patients with other types of illness.

Claire Brosseau, a woman with treatment resistant bipolar 1 disorder who is part of the federal case challenging Canada's current laws, told the BBC earlier this year that euthanasia would offer her \"a safe death\".

But concerns have been raised about whether mental illnesses are currently understood well enough by medicine to determine appropriate eligibility.

\"When I hear that there is a lack of consensus in the medical community about the irremediable nature of certain mental illnesses, that gives me real cause for concern,\" Fraser said.

Some experts have also raised concerns more broadly that Canada's assisted dying programme has become a tool to alleviate the suffering of people who would be better served by improved access to affordable housing and healthcare, and not an option of last resort.

In a report earlier this year, a parliamentary committee noted competing opinions on the issue but recomended Canada \"indefinitely exclude persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness\" from assisted dying.

It added that there is a \"pressing need for increased and more equitable access to adequate mental health services\".

The conclusions were made after committee members heard from doctors, advocates and experts from countries that do allow assisted dying for people solely with mental illness, like the Netherlands and Belgium.

Not all committee members agreed with its recommendation, and some released a dissenting report arguing the process was \"fundamentally flawed\" and \"biased\".

Polls suggest the majority of Canadians support access to medically assisted death but that support falls it comes to patients with mental illness alone.

If you have been affected by any of the issues raised in this story, information and support can be found at the BBC's Action Line.

In Canada, support can be found at the Suicide Crisis Helpline by dialling 988

Read more about strikes in the Black Sea.

Get the latest on the Conservative Party conference.

Southampton boss Tonda Eckert is free to continue coaching at the club after receiving a six-week ban - suspended for two years - for his part in the Spygate scandal.

READ MORE: Eckert free to stay as Southampton boss as Spygate ban suspended

More stories from around Scotland.

More on Christa Pike's condition.

Read more on the Oct 7 anniversary.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

More on the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.