URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cm5yn3592xk9o
BBC 13:09

Japan beer giants raided over alleged price-fixing cartel

Asahi Super Dry beers are seen on display at a supermarket in Tokyo on October 3, 2025.

Japanese officials have raided the country's biggest beer makers over allegations they worked together to raise the price of their beverages.

Asahi, Kirin and Suntory Spirits confirmed to the BBC their premises had been searched by the Japan Fair Trade Commission, adding that they would fully cooperate with the government authority.

There are reports Sapporo Breweries was also raided. The firm has been contacted for comment.

Asahi, Kirin and Sapporo all saw their share price fall after news of the investigation broke on Wednesday. Suntory is not publicly-listed.

According to the Japan Times, the investigation centres on the companies raising their prices in April last year and in October 2022.

All four companies announced increases, citing the rising cost of raw materials as well as other factors such as energy and transportation.

Kirin Holdings said its subsidiary, Kirin Brewery Company, was searched \"on suspicion of a violation of the Antimonopoly Act\".

It said it takes the matter \"very seriously\", adding it would \"fully cooperate with the Japan Fair Trade Commission's investigation and any requests for cooperation\".

Kirin Holdings said: \"At present, the impact of this matter on the company's financial results has not been determined. The company will promptly disclose any material developments as they arise.\"

A spokesperson for Suntory confirmed \"an on-site inspection\" had taken place \"in connection with a potential violation of Japan's Antimonopoly Act relating to domestic alcohol trade practices\".

The company said: \"We sincerely apologise for any concern or inconvenience this situation may cause to our customers, business partners, and other stakeholders. We will cooperate fully with the JFTC's investigation.\"

Asahi Breweries said it was \"subject to investigation by the Japan Fair Trade Commission\". It added: \"We will fully cooperate with the commission.\"

The Japan Fair Trade Commission has been contacted for comment.

Read more about strikes in the Black Sea.

Get the latest on the Conservative Party conference.

Southampton boss Tonda Eckert is free to continue coaching at the club after receiving a six-week ban - suspended for two years - for his part in the Spygate scandal.

READ MORE: Eckert free to stay as Southampton boss as Spygate ban suspended

More stories from around Scotland.

More on Christa Pike's condition.

Read more on the Oct 7 anniversary.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

More on the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.