URL: https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/uss-lincoln-aircraft-carrier-returns-home-after-record-deployment-supporting-iran-war
PBS 18:04BST

.st0{fill:#FFFFFF;} .st1{fill:#FFFFFF;}
      
        
        
        
          
            
            
              
              
            
          
        
      
    
















    
      
        
          
        
        
      
    
    
      
        
          
        
        
        
      
    
    
      
        
          .cls-1 { fill: #fff; stroke-width: 0px; }
        
      
      
        
        
         
        
      
    


  
    
    
    
    
    
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
        
        
        
        
        
      
    
  
  
    
      
      
      
      
        
        
        
        
        
      
    
  




    
      
      
      
      
      
    
    
      
    
    
    
      


    

    

        

            

    
        
            
                
                    
                
                Full Episode
            
            
                                                                            
                    
    
    
        
                            
                    
        
            Tuesday, Oct 6
        
    



            

                
                    
                    Close Menu
                

                
                    
                        
                        PBS NewsHour
                    
                

                
                    Episodes
                    Podcasts
                    Newsletters
                

            

            
                
                    
                        The Latest
                    
                
                
                    
                        Politics
                        
                            
                            
                                Brooks and Capehart
                                Politics Monday
                                Supreme Court
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Arts
                        
                            
                            
                                CANVAS
                                Poetry
                                Now Read This
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Nation
                        
                            
                            
                                America at a Crossroads
                                Supreme Court
                                Race Matters
                                Essays
                                Brief But Spectacular
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        World
                        
                            
                            
                                Agents for Change
                                Compass Points
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Economy
                        
                            
                            
                                Making Sen$e
                                Paul Solman
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Science
                        
                            
                            
                                The Leading Edge
                                ScienceScope
                                Basic Research
                                Innovation and Invention
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Health
                        
                            
                            
                                Horizons
                                Long-Term Care
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        Education
                        
                            
                            
                                Teachers -->
                                Teachers' Lounge
                                Student Reporting Labs
                            
                        
                    
                
                
                    

                    For Teachers
                    
                        
                        
                            Newshour Classroom
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        About
                        
                            
                            Feedback
                            Funders
							 Support
                            Jobs
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                Close Menu
            
        

    

    



    
      


          

    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

        
    
    PBS News
        
      





  

    
        
            
                
                    
                    
                    
                
                Menu
            
            
                
                    Notifications
                
                
                    Get news alerts from PBS News
                    Turn on desktop notifications?
                    Yes
                    Not now
                
            
        
    

    
    

    
        Full Episodes
        Podcasts
        Newsletters
        Live
    

    
    


  
  

    

      

        
        
                    
            
    

        
    

                        
        
                
        
            
            
                
                
                
            
        

        

                            



        
    

        
        

            By —

            
                
                    Associated Press
                
                
                    Associated Press

The USS Abraham Lincoln aircraft carrier returns home to California Thursday, the Navy announced Friday, following a record-setting uninterrupted time at sea supporting the Iran war and intense scrutiny over ship conditions.

WATCH: Trump dismisses concerns over conditions on long-deployed USS Abraham Lincoln

Reports emerged of crew stress and poor mental health, as well as shortages of food and hygiene products. Democratic California Rep. Sara Jacobs said she recently visited the ship and spoke to sailors and Marines who shared stories of "their struggles to wash clothes, get medicine and health care, and eat enough food."

Subscribe to Here’s the Deal, our politics
                 newsletter for analysis you won’t find anywhere else.

Thank you. Please check your inbox to confirm.

President Donald Trump had downplayed reports about conditions on the Lincoln, which left its homeport in November, arrived in the Middle East in January, and spent a record-setting uninterrupted time at sea of more than 260 days.

WATCH: Trump says USS Lincoln's deployment was 'not nearly long enough'

In August, Trump said the sailors endured a "good period of time" but added that "over the years, we've had them out there much longer."

Support trusted journalism and civil dialogue.

Left:
                The U.S. Navy Nimitz-class aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln before docking for a rest stop following a long deployment in the Middle East, in Chonburi province, Thailand, Sept. 2, 2026. File photo by Chalinee Thirasupa/ Reuters

By Ben Finley, Konstantin Toropin, Associated Press

By Safiyah Riddle, Amy Taxin, Jack Brook, Associated Press

By Konstantin Toropin, Associated Press

By Aliza Rudavsky, The Conversation

By Konstantin Toropin, Aamer Madhani, Associated Press

Associated Press
                
                
                    Associated Press

Support Provided By:
    Learn more

© 1996 - 2026 NewsHour Productions LLC. All Rights Reserved.

PBS is a 501(c)(3) not-for-profit organization.

Subscribe to Here's the Deal with Lisa Desjardins

Support for News Hour Provided By