URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cw0k08nnz07go
BBC: schools told wear more clothes as energy bills rise

'Wear more clothes if it's cold,' schools told as energy bills rise

Three children sitting at their school desks. They have their hands raised and are facing away from the camera.

Staff and pupils at schools across Northern Ireland have been told to \"wear more clothes\" if it is cold in order to cut heating bills.

Schools have been told by the Education Authority (EA) to reduce heating and lighting \"wherever possible\".

The authority has said that school gas and electricity bills are set to rise by about £8m by March 2027.

The EA has written to school heads warning that increasing costs will affect school energy bills.

Kirsty Logan-Hall says her school is in an older building which presents energy efficiency challenges

Rising energy costs are already affecting households across Northern Ireland.

The impact of the US-Israel war with Iran is one of the factors behind the increase.

The letter from the EA to head teachers said that \"recent geopolitical events are expected to have a substantial impact on energy costs across the Education Authority (EA) during the 2026/27 financial year\".

It said that total school gas bills were expected to go up by 60% from £10.7m to £17m by March 2027.

Meanwhile, total school electricity bills are expected to rise by 5% from £23.8m to £25.1m by March 2027.

\"Given the scale of the anticipated cost increases, we are asking all schools to review their energy usage and identify opportunities to reduce consumption wherever possible,\" the EA said.

Among the measures the authority has suggested to schools are cutting heating use by an hour a day and switching off classroom lights to use natural daylight instead.

Staff and pupils have also been advised to \"wear more clothes\" rather than turn the heating thermostat up if it is cold.

But principals have told BBC News NI that it is not straightforward for schools to cut heating costs.

The principal of Tullygally Primary School in Craigavon, Kirsty Logan-Hall, said that the school was \"committed to promoting responsible energy consumption and regularly reinforce good practice with staff and pupils\".

\"However, our ability to achieve significant reductions in energy usage is constrained by the nature of our estate,\" she said.

\"The school operates from an older building which presents inherent energy efficiency challenges.

\"In addition, our site is particularly spread out due to the accommodation and operational requirements associated with our specialist provision.

\"This necessitates the heating, lighting and ongoing use of multiple areas across the site throughout the school day to ensure appropriate learning environments, accessibility and pupil welfare.

\"It is important to recognise that there is limited scope for reducing energy consumption without adversely impacting the quality of provision, staff working conditions or the wellbeing of pupils, including those with additional needs.\"

Claire Robinson says heating can't just be \"turned off\" in some parts of the school

Meanwhile, the principal of Holy Evangelists Primary School in Dunmurry, Claire Robinson, said that energy costs were \"ferocious\".

\"We can't play around with the heating,\" she said.

Parts of the school are relatively new and have underfloor heating.

\"Our classrooms can't drop below a certain temperature so we have to keep the heating on,\" Robinson said.

\"We can't just turn the heating off in some areas of the school.\"

Robinson said that although the school was relatively new it had been given an energy efficiency rating of D due to the costs involved in running the heating system.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Kemi Badenoch has said she would rather have another general election than do a deal with Reform UK if no party wins the next election.

In an interview with the BBC's Chris Mason the Tory party leader said she said that Nigel Farage's Reform Party are \"neck deep in scandal\" and joining forces with them would \"just be one problem after another\", adding I don't have time for that.

The Conservative Party are meeting in Birmingham for their annual conference.

Read more about the Conservative Party's annual conference in Birmingham.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Read more on Caleb Flynn's sentencing.

More about Jeremy Clarkson's surprise appearance at the Conservative Party conference.