URL: https://www.npr.org/2026/10/06/nx-s1-5992819/france-student-protests-schools
NPR: France tear gas water cannon school protests

Accessibility links   
            Skip to main content
      Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
   


      
         


      
         



    
        
            
                
                    
                    Open Navigation Menu
                
            

            
                
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                    
                      
                        
                      
                      Newsletters
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                
                  
                
                NPR Shop
                
            

            
                
                
                  
                
                Get NPR+
                
            

            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                    Close Navigation Menu
                
            
            
                
                    
                      
                       
                      Home
                      
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          News
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for News
                        
                    

                    
                        National
                        World
                        Politics
                        Business
                        Elections
                        Health
                        Science
                        Climate
                        Race
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Culture
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Culture
                        
                    

                    
                        Books
                        Movies
                        Television
                        Pop Culture
                        Food
                        Art & Design 
                        Performing Arts
                        Life Kit
                        Gaming
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Music
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Music
                        
                    

                    
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    


                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Podcasts & Shows
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    

                    
                        Daily
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Morning Edition
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Saturday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Sunday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    All Things Considered
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Up First
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Here & Now
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    NPR Politics Podcast
                                
                            
                        
                        Featured

                        
    
        
        Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!
    

    
        
        Fresh Air
    

    
        
        Wild Card with Rachel Martin
    

    
        
        It's Been a Minute
    

    
        
        Embedded
    


                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Get NPR+
                                
                            

                            More Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Search
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Newsletters
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          NPR Shop
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                        Get NPR+
                        
                    
                
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                      
                    
                

                
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    

            
        
    
    
        
            
                About NPR
                Diversity
                Support
                Careers
                Press
                Ethics
            
        
    


      France national day of protests face down riot police, tear gas, water cannons   More than a quarter of a million people rallied nationwide to support school students demanding more education funding, according to government figures, with thousands of arrests.


         

    
        Europe
    


      France's police fire tear gas and water cannons as school protests sweep the country
   
   
   




      
            
                  
    
            Updated October 6, 20263:47 PM ET

                
                    Originally published October 6, 20262:05 PM ET
                

                
    

      
      

   
   

   
            
                  
                        
                              By

Riot police use a water cannon as they face students during a protest against under-resourced schools, in Rennes, western France, Tuesday.
                
                    
                    Jeremias Gonzalez/AP
                    
                
                hide caption

PARIS — Police fired tear gas to control crowds in Paris and elsewhere in France on Tuesday as more than a quarter of a million people rallied nationwide to support high school students demanding more education funding, according to government figures. The protests increased pressure on the administration of outgoing President Emmanuel Macron.

As pupils blockaded high schools, large crowds waving flags and placards gathered in Marseille, Strasbourg and other cities. The demonstrations showed how protests that began at a high school in the Paris region in mid-September have grown into a nationwide movement — the latest of many that have marked Macron's nearly decade-long tenure.

"We need to listen to them," said Léa Monimart, an adult demonstrator in the northern city of Lille. "They are 17 years old; they are not completely clueless, and they know what they are talking about. It's important to show that there are adults who support them."

The Interior Ministry estimated that 266,000 people took part in demonstrations across the country on Tuesday, including 56,000 in Paris, where small groups of protesters clashed with riot officers at a city square at the end of a largely peaceful march.

Nearly 500 people were detained Tuesday, the ministry said. The widespread use of arrests, tear gas and riot-control weapons against teenagers is fueling defiance and angering some parents and teachers. Some student groups called for new protests Thursday.

Interior Minister Laurent Nuñez said the police response had been proportionate in "almost all cases" and that the protests had at times turned into riots, requiring police intervention.

French Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu said the government and school leaders must listen to students' concerns and find solutions.

Questioned in parliament on Tuesday about the protest movement, Lecornu denounced "ultra violence" threatening schools. Responding to criticism of police tactics, he pledged that any "accidents" would be investigated and described allegations that the police are racist as a "lie."

More than two weeks of class boycotts and school blockades, and policing that has led to more than 6,500 arrests, mostly of minors, have become a flashpoint in the early days of the presidential election campaign.

Felix Barney, a university student, described the police response as disproportionate, saying it doesn't make "any sense to hit minors."

"Riot police, batons, rubber bullets, tear gas," said Aurélien Le Coq, a lawmaker with the far-left France Unbowed party. Its presidential candidate is strongly backing the protests.

Students chant slogans during a demonstration against under-resourced schools, in Paris, Tuesday.
                
                    
                    Teresa Suarez/AP
                    
                
                hide caption

The violence is "absolutely unbearable," Le Coq said.

Nuñez defended police tactics despite a growing number of severe injuries blamed on officers' riot-control weapons. In the latest case, a 15-year-old boy lost a hand Monday in an incident involving a police stun grenade. He said 715 officers had been injured.

The teenage protesters have struck a chord amid widespread discontent in France. Frustrations extend beyond immediate difficulties, such as fuel prices that have soared because of the Iran war, to broader concerns about constraints on public spending, rising poverty and wealth inequality under Macron, who can't run for a third consecutive term.

Against that backdrop, pupils' complaints that education funding shortfalls are endangering their futures have found a sympathetic audience.

"You say 'young people are the future,' so listen to them," read a handwritten placard attached to a metal barrier outside a Paris school.

At the Hélène Boucher lycée, or high school, in Paris' 20th district, protesters tipped over trash cans and bicycles onto their sides to create a makeshift barricade.

Like hundreds of others around the country, the school was closed. Authorities began shutting schools last week to take some steam out of the demonstrations after widespread damage to schools and mounting injuries among staff, students and police. Classes were totally or partially suspended on Tuesday at 891 schools, according to the Education Ministry.

Facing accusations that it was ignoring protesters, the ministry launched an online portal inviting high school students to anonymously describe the difficulties they face at school and the changes they want to see.

At Hélène Boucher, parents and other adults positioned themselves on Tuesday between protesters and police keeping watch.

"They are our children. Teachers, parents, federations, we all share the same goal: the protection of children's rights, and it is a legitimate right to demonstrate and to make demands," said Emilia Sichili Suriam, who is a member of an association of parents.

Demonstrators have voiced a range of grievances, often centering on a lack of resources and opportunities for students in disadvantaged schools, despite the promise of France's national motto: "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity."

Students have drawn attention to rundown classrooms that lack basics such as desks and chairs, become sweltering in summer without air conditioning and, in some cases, are infested with rats. Other common complaints include staff shortages and exhausting workloads. French high school students' compulsory classroom hours are among the highest in Europe.

Suzanne Nijdam, president of the federation of student associations, vowed that demonstrations would continue until authorities address the complaints.

"So, we really need to act now, and it's in the government's hands, to see these demands through to the end," she said. "It's a matter of political priority, a matter of prioritizing the youth and the future of our country."

Neighboring Belgium is also seeing student protests. More than 30 were arrested Tuesday and several police injured in the eastern city of Liege, and smaller protests were held in Brussels and other cities.

NPR does not offer or accept money for coverage or interviews.
                Anyone who makes such an offer or request is not an NPR employee and does not represent NPR.