URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c9e8ld3j6k53o
BBC: military training sites investigated

Military training sites to be investigated following rape and abuse claims at Army college

The investigation will look at 10 Army establishments, including the Army Foundation College in Harrogate where teenage recruits train

A stock image shows the feet of junior soldiers lining up with guns as they prepare to march ahead of their graduation parade at the Army Foundation College in 2015.

An independent investigation is being carried out into 10 military training sites in England, following claims of rape and sexual assault at an Army college for under-18s.

In August, four young women told the BBC they had been sexually assaulted and harassed at the Army Foundation College, in Harrogate, North Yorkshire.

One said she had been raped by several fellow junior soldiers in an attack that lasted hours.

The Armed Forces Commissioner, Polly Miller-Perkins, who is carrying out her first investigation in the role, has called the allegations \"absolutely appalling\".

She will visit the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst (RMAS) - where all officers in the British Army are trained - and Britannia Royal Naval College, in Dartmouth - where the Royal Navy's prestigious officer training base is located. She will also visit the Army Foundation College, where the youngest recruits are trained.

The commissioner has the power to visit UK defence sites unannounced and request information from the government.

She can compile reports and command the attention of the defence secretary and Parliament regarding issues she feels need exposure.

Miller-Perkins said her recommendations will be made public, but critics have questioned whether her findings will lead to change.

One survivor of sexual assault, who attended the Army Foundation College, told the BBC she had no confidence in the process.

Miller-Perkins, a former air commodore, said the BBC's reporting \"brought into sharp focus\" potential problems in military training establishments, including allegations of predatory behaviour towards women.

\"I take this hugely seriously,\" she said. \"I already had concerns, but there's absolutely no doubt that your report reinforced these concerns.\"

The Armed Forces Commissioner Polly Miller-Perkins will speak to staff, recruits and their families

\"Certainly when people go into phase one training, they are coming from a whole swathe of socio-economic backgrounds, and it's up to the MoD (Ministry of Defence) to bring those individuals up to the values and standards that would be expected in a modern armed forces - and that includes respect for women.\"

Defence Secretary Wes Streeting has previously said he wanted to lead cultural change in the UK military. \"I expect every woman who serves to be treated with respect, with decency,\" he said.

The Armed Forces Commissioner is a newly-created role to provide independent oversight of the service complaints system. It also acts as a direct point of contact for serving personnel so they can raise problems that are impacting their lives and their ability to serve.

Miller-Perkins said she would aim to identify any systemic issues and make recommendations to the government to \"ensure the welfare and safety of all personnel\".

She said she plans to visit each of the 10 establishments in November and will speak to families, staff and recruits. She said the aim was to establish some early findings in the New Year.

\"I'm interested in following the evidence, so we will go where the evidence leads us,\" she said. \"This is independent - I think that's absolutely crucial. I am an independent voice and advocate of service people and their families.\"

However, one of the women the BBC spoke to as part of our investigation into the Army Foundation College said she had little confidence people would want to be honest about their experience with \"another military person\".

\"It's easier for me to talk to you [a reporter] than it is to talk to someone who is an army or RAF person because they already are on the side of them.

\"It's not easy to trust them because I know they're supposed to be independent but military life is ingrained in you - it's hard to step away from that and see the faults when it's what you've worked in for years.\"

Miller-Perkins said she \"understands trust has to be earned\" and expects to be judged on what her office delivers. She said she had been planning the review into training establishments since she began the job in the Spring.

\"I would like to think if I put recommendations in front of the Secretary of State and the MoD, that they will take those very seriously because I certainly do.\"

The BBC investigation into the Army Foundation College also documented women making claims about inappropriate language and behaviour from some of the instructors, including marking young female recruits on their looks.

The Ministry of Defence said it welcomed independent scrutiny. A spokesman said: \"We are committed to ensuring everyone beginning their military career receives the highest standards of training, welfare and support in a safe and professional environment.\"

In relation to the Army Foundation College allegations, it added: \"Unacceptable and criminal behaviour has no place in the military, and it encourages anyone who has experienced such conduct to come forward. It said the college welcomes scrutiny and has received an outstanding report from Ofsted.\"

Details of help and support with sexual abuse or violence is available at BBC Action Line.

Get our flagship newsletter with all the headlines you need to start the day. Sign up here.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Kemi Badenoch has said she would rather have another general election than do a deal with Reform UK if no party wins the next election.

In an interview with the BBC's Chris Mason the Tory party leader said she said that Nigel Farage's Reform Party are \"neck deep in scandal\" and joining forces with them would \"just be one problem after another\", adding I don't have time for that.

The Conservative Party are meeting in Birmingham for their annual conference.

Read more about the Conservative Party's annual conference in Birmingham.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Read more on Caleb Flynn's sentencing.

More about Jeremy Clarkson's surprise appearance at the Conservative Party conference.