URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cve8x724e9ezo
BBC News — "Burnham vows to end existing pension triple lock in 2030 to help fund care", published 29 September 2026, 17:39 BST (Exa metadata 2026-09-29T17:39:06Z). THIS IS THE APPROVED SETTLED ARTICLE ON THE DELIVERED SPEECH that was not indexed in time for last night's edition. Found in my own sweep at 07:50 BST on 30 September. Text via Exa search highlights.

Andy Burnham has set out his plan to transform Britain, including by ending the existing state pension
triple lock from 2030 to help fund a new national care service. His plans would see the state pension
increase every year at least by inflation or 2.5% but remove the automatic annual link with average
earnings.

Burnham accepted he may "pay a political price" but argued "someone has to go through the pain barrier and
rip the plaster off".

The triple lock was introduced in 2010 by the coalition government. It means state pension rates rise every
April by either inflation, earnings growth or 2.5%, whichever is the highest. Burnham said this will stay in
place until 2030, at which point he would like to "adjust it".

VERBATIM: "The state pension will continue to rise every year at least by prices or 2.5%. And it will hold
its value relative to earnings over time so that pensioners will always share in the rising prosperity of
the nation. But this change will generate significant savings which we will use to build up our national
care service. Some may not realise it but older people with nothing more than the state pension, or only a
little more, can find themselves paying care charges today from that small income. Under my plan, this will
no longer happen."

"Officials have suggested the change could save £15bn a year by 2040."

Jonathan Cribb, Institute for Fiscal Studies: savings are "likely to be relatively small in the first few
years, but rise substantially over time". He also said "we should not expect this reform to save enough that
it could fund universal social care in the next parliament".

Sharon Graham, general secretary of Unite, told the BBC she believed the government should have "pulled
another lever", such as a wealth tax.

REACTION, verbatim: Conservative leader Kemi Badenoch said "more tax rises are inevitable" under Labour's
plan. Reform UK's Nigel Farage accused the PM of "launching an offensive against our elderly". Liberal
Democrat leader Sir Ed Davey said families "cannot wait until after another election and it can't be funded
from the pockets of our poorest pensioners".
