URL: https://www.politico.eu/newsletter/london-playbook/they-stopped-fighting-and-they-were-one/
Politico Europe, London Playbook — published 30 September 2026, 06:10 BST (Exa metadata 2026-09-30T06:10:00Z). Approved source. Text via Exa search highlights.

THE LANGUAGE FIGHT, which matters for accuracy: "Watch for how closely Burnham disputes the language that
he is scrapping the triple lock — and instead reaches for more nuanced language about tweaking it. Those in
government were insisting on referring to the new system as the 'adjusted triple lock' and initial
assumptions that it will instead become a 'double lock' aren't quite right given a link to earnings will
still exist."
"However, Burnham was also clear that the state pension will rise by less than it otherwise would've done.
It is designed to save billions by removing what the Resolution Foundation and much of wonk world calls the
'ratchet' effect, where the state pension rises rapidly thanks to inflation one year... and then again the
next year as earnings increase to catch up with inflation."

COVERAGE: "No fewer than eight of the papers splash on Burnham 'scrapping' or 'ending' the triple lock by
2030 to pay for social care. It also led the News at Ten."

TODAY: Burnham is on radio and TV all day selling it; DWP Secretary Pat McFadden is also touring studios.

POLLING — TWO POST-SPEECH SNAP POLLS, BOTH FAVOURABLE:
- "a snap YouGov poll pointing to 48% support for changing the triple lock to fund social care compared to
  28% opposition"
- "Polling conducted by Survation for the 'progressives'-friendly Mandate Research consultancy, shared with
  Playbook... When shown BBC News clips of the speech, 69% of the 1,548 people polled said they feel
  positive about the triple lock changes compared to 12% negative."

THE FUNDING DOUBT: "'Clearly the triple lock over the next decade is not going to come close to funding a
free social care service,' former IFS boss Paul Johnson said (h/t the Times). Johnson reckons you need to
find more big savings or raise taxes."

THE SCOTTISH MODEL CRITICISM: officials suggested the care service could resemble Scotland's free personal
care model, where care is funded in people's own homes but accommodation costs in residential care are not.
Andrew Dilnot, who led the review on this 15 years ago, told the FT such a system would be "cheaper, but
would fail to cover catastrophic costs and to protect houses and savings" — i.e. pensioners could still be
forced to sell their houses.

POLITICS: Reform UK has "placed raging columns from Nigel Farage in the Mail and Robert Jenrick in the
Telegraph promising they will keep the triple lock intact." But former Conservative Chancellor JEREMY HUNT
was BACKING BURNHAM last night. Unite's Sharon Graham told the BBC after the speech she would have preferred
another "lever" and would work to convince the PM to change course, pointing out that even with the triple
lock Britain pays a lower state pension than other countries — "Ireland, for goodness sake!"

Europe was "relegated to a relative side issue in the write-ups from the Mail, Telegraph, Sun and Express".
