URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmlyr71jq44wo
BBC News — published Wednesday 30 September 2026, 15:33 BST (Bea Swallow, Dawn Limbu)

Residents left 'like sitting ducks' amid RAF Fairford incident

Residents living near RAF Fairford say they have been "left feeling like sitting ducks" at the centre of major counter-terrorism probe.
Five men were arrested on suspicion of the preparation of a terrorist act after three vans were spotted near the Gloucestershire base, which the US military operates.
As 85 homes were evacuated in the middle of the night, one couple said their child had been left traumatised after witnessing armed police point a gun at their father. The BBC has approached Counter Terrorism Policing for comment.

Gloucestershire Constabulary said it had received a call about "three suspicious vehicles" travelling towards the military airbase at 00:45 BST on Sunday. A 400m (1,312ft) cordon was established and a bomb disposal team was deployed.
Counter Terrorism Policing revealed on Tuesday a quantity of petrol but no explosive devices had been found during searches.
The five men, all UK nationals in their early 20s from London, were released on bail, which Counter Terrorism Policing said was "an investigative decision and one which is grounded in experience and strategy".

A couple, who asked not to be named, claims Whelford villagers were warned to stay home on Saturday night - hours before the alarm was first raised by a farmer. The pair were evacuated from their home the following morning, after the vans were found abandoned at the end of their driveway. But when the husband stepped outside, he said he was confronted by armed police.
"Then one of them got out of the vehicle and put a gun on me, in my direction. Then the other officer also got out, put a gun on me, and said 'Who's asked you to leave?'."
The couple said they and their terrified child were briefly trapped inside their home before managing to escape through a neighbour's property. After being allowed to return home, the pair saw the van doors had been "blown off" and their contents emptied, with water butts and oil drums strewn on the ground.

Temporary Chief Constable Maggie Blyth, of Gloucestershire Constabulary, explained the force was limited in what information it could share with residents.
"Some of that information won't be forthcoming while there is a live investigation, and it is really important for everyone in that area to understand that," she said.
Blyth assured multiple information points would be set up in the area over the coming days to offer ongoing reassurance and address concerns. "There is a much stronger visibility around the communities affected by this major incident," she added.

Counter Terrorism Policing confirmed the cordon, which was in place near the airbase, had been lifted on Wednesday afternoon.
The Whelford woman described an "eerily quiet atmosphere" in the wake of a major incident, with police, drones, and forensic investigators still circling the area.
Police and Crime Commissioner for Gloucestershire Chris Nelson encouraged members of the public to contact the police if they witness any suspicious activity.
