URL: https://news.sky.com/story/labour-members-call-on-government-to-cancel-palantirs-nhs-contract-13591968
Sky News — published 25 September 2026 23:01 / 26 September 2026 (Amanda Akass, political correspondent)
[NOTE: This is the APPROVED-outlet carrier for the Palantir emergency motion itself. Text below is the Sky News wire copy as syndicated verbatim. The subsequent Conference Arrangements Committee decision to BLOCK the motion could NOT be found in any approved outlet.]

Labour members call on government to cancel Palantir's NHS contract

Delegates at the Labour party conference in Liverpool are trying to pressurise the government into cancelling its £330m NHS contract with the controversial US tech giant Palantir.

An emergency motion has been submitted calling on the Department of Health and Social Care to exercise a break clause in its contract with Palantir to run the Federated Data Platform (FDP).

The FDP uses Palantir's AI-powered data analytics software to bring together information from across the health service so hospitals can analyse it more easily and make improvements.

The motion, put forward by the Labour-affiliated Socialist Health Association and at least three constituency parties, claims Palantir is "facing numerous allegations of involvement in serious breaches of human rights, including due to it developing technology for Israel's military to use in its unlawful occupation of Palestinian land and genocide in Gaza".

The motion's authors also highlight the recent appointment of Labour peer and former deputy leader Tom Watson as senior vice president at Palantir UK, arguing "links between senior politicians and private companies creates distrust amongst voters, particularly where public contracts are awarded... the Labour government has a responsibility to uphold public trust in politics".

Both the science and technology and health and social care select committees have called for the government to invoke the February 2027 termination clause of the FDP contract, which was signed in 2023, as well as the British Medical Association and the union Unison.

Rathi Guhadasan, chair of the Socialist Health Association, said: "Palantir's human rights record is easily enough to disqualify it from government contracts - from its use in Donald Trump's immigration crackdown, to Israel's use of its technology to target Palestinians in its genocide in Gaza.
"But even on its own terms, a growing body of evidence within the NHS shows its technology is not fit for purpose or cost effective. Andy Burnham should show he means change, listen to NHS workers, and cancel Palantir's NHS contract."

A conference committee will decide on Saturday whether the emergency motion will be debated and voted on during Labour's annual gathering in Liverpool, which starts on Sunday.

The motion's authors hope it will be supported by Unison, given the union's previous position on Palantir. It is backed by Labour's left-wing faction Momentum and the Palestine Solidarity Campaign.

Ministers told MPs earlier this week the Palantir contract would be "reviewed in line with standard contract management processes and the outcome will be announced in the normal way in due course".
