URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmlyr71jq44wo
BBC News, published Wed 30 Sep 2026 16:11 BST

Residents near RAF Fairford left 'like sitting ducks'

Counter Terrorism Policing have been investigating the incident at RAF Fairford in the early hours of Sunday

Police officers on 29 September 2026 guard an area when roadblocks were in place at the time near RAF Fairford airbase. The two police officers are carrying guns and wearing firearms uniforms. One officer is standing, the other is kneeling and facing into the window of a police car.

Residents living near RAF Fairford say they have been \"left feeling like sitting ducks\" at the centre of major counter-terrorism probe.

Five men were arrested on suspicion of the preparation of a terrorist act after three vans were spotted near the Gloucestershire base, which the US military operates.

As 85 homes were evacuated in the middle of the night, one couple said their child had been left traumatised after witnessing armed police point a gun at their father. The BBC has approached Counter Terrorism Policing for comment.

However, an anonymous resident from Whelford said she \"could not fault\" the quick response of UK authorities, describing officers as \"calm, thorough and precise\".

Police said petrol but no explosive devices were found during searches of the vans found near the base

Gloucestershire Constabulary said it had received a call about \"three suspicious vehicles\" travelling towards the military airbase at 00:45 BST on Sunday.

A 400m (1,312ft) cordon was established and a bomb disposal team was deployed.

The government believes Iran played a part in the RAF Fairford incident which resulted in five men, all UK nationals in their early 20s from London, being arrested and then bailed, Prime Minister Andy Burnham has said.

Counter Terrorism Policing revealed on Tuesday a quantity of petrol but no explosive devices had been found during searches.

An army bomb disposal robot was deployed to inspect the three suspicious white vans near RAF Fairford

The Whelford resident said she had noticed an \"uneasiness in the air\" in the the days leading up to the incident, alongside extra concrete barricades around the airbase.

\"It seems as if they were absolutely aware of something, but no information was passed on to locals until it was in full swing,\" she said.

\"We were left feeling like sitting ducks in whatever operation was unfolding.

\"Regardless of if this was a dummy run, staged, a real threat or something entirely different - the lack of correspondence and care towards locals from a huge military base right next door is what feels most concerning to me.\"

However, she praised the response of local authorities as \"incredible\", adding \"they have been very warm, caring and efficient in any interaction so far\".

A couple allege two armed police officers pointed guns at them during the evacuation

A couple, who asked not to be named, claims Whelford villagers were warned to stay home on Saturday night - hours before the alarm was first raised by a farmer.

The pair were evacuated from their home the following morning, after the vans were found abandoned at the end of their driveway.

But when the husband stepped outside, he said he was confronted by armed police.

\"I was trying to get my wallet out to say, 'look I'm a resident here',\" he said.

\"Then one of them got out of the vehicle and put a gun on me, in my direction.

\"Then the other officer also got out, put a gun on me, and said 'Who's asked you to leave?'.\"

The couple said they and and their terrified child were briefly trapped inside their home before managing to escape through a neighbour's property.

UK believes Iran involved in RAF Fairford incident, Burnham says

Timeline of RAF Fairford incident and the investigation so far

One of the five men arrested near RAF Fairford called 999 himself

After being allowed to return home, the pair saw the van doors had been \"blown off\" and their contents emptied, with water butts and oil drums strewn on the ground.

\"All of a sudden, you see on the news the five suspected terrorists have been released,\" the husband said.

\"You're thinking, 'Is this for real?'.

\"We've all been panicking for the best part of a day and a bit. Are our homes going to get blown up? Could we have been blown up?\"

The family say they are \"angry\" over an absence of communication from authorities in the days leading up to the incident, alongside the lack of reassurance afterwards.

Five British nationals who were arrested on suspicion of explosives offences have been released on bail

Temporary Chief Constable Maggie Blyth, of Gloucestershire Constabulary, explained the force was limited in what information it could share with residents.

\"Some of that information won't be forthcoming while there is a live investigation, and it is really important for everyone in that area to understand that,\" she said.

Blyth assured multiple information points would be set up in the area over the coming days to offer ongoing reassurance and address concerns.

\"There is a much stronger visibility around the communities affected by this major incident,\" she added.

Residents say they had noticed increased security measures in the days prior to the incident

But in Marston Meysey, a village located immediately south-west of the airbase, across the border in Wiltshire, residents say they would like to see equal treatment from Wiltshire Police.

Local resident Gerry, who said he was speaking \"on behalf of Marston Meysey parish meeting, we've got a little working group for airbase issues,\" explained: \"We don't really see a lot of activity for security protection from Wiltshire Police, but we see quite a lot from the Ministry of Defence (MoD) and Gloucestershire Police.

\"We wish there was a bit more information so we could put this to bed, but there's very little. We would welcome regular updates that affect us.\"

Wiltshire Police neighbourhood Insp Lawrence Copeland acknowledged the concerns the recent events had caused to a \"small, tight-knit community\".

\"Our neighbourhood teams conduct regular patrols in the village and you may notice an enhanced presence over the coming days,\" he said.