URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c6j9xmd0730mo
BBC News — published Wednesday 30 September 2026, 15:04 BST (Florence Freeman)

Timeline of RAF Fairford incident and the investigation so far

The public is slowly getting more information about what happened near the RAF Fairford airbase at the weekend - but many questions remain unanswered.
We know that two early-morning calls were made to police about suspicious vehicles, and that five men, all British nationals in their 20s, were arrested on suspicion of explosives offences and terrorism offences.
We also know they were later released on bail, and the BBC understands that one of the men was the first 999 caller.
We now know that in the days leading up to the incident, security was increased around RAF Fairford, one of the UK's most important military sites, which is used by the US Air Force.
There were also reports of heightened police activity around the base on Saturday evening, hours before three suspicious vehicles were reported to police.

Gloucestershire police say they received a call just after midnight on Sunday 27 September about "three suspicious vehicles" that appeared to be travelling towards RAF Fairford. The BBC now understands that one of the five men who was later arrested and then bailed had made the call himself.
Nearly an hour later, [a farmer living close] to the base called 999 after [seeing] three vans parked in a "weird formation".
Shortly afterwards - although the exact time is unknown - Gloucestershire Constabulary arrested five men in the Whelford area, a village right next to the base. They were arrested on suspicion of committing offences under the Explosives Act.

08:00 - Major incident declared and homes evacuated
After sunrise, police declared a major incident in Whelford and set up a 400m (1,312ft) cordon around the three vehicles. The Army's Explosive Ordnance Disposal unit was brought in to examine them, and aerial pictures showed a remote-controlled robot approaching some white vans. About 85 households in Whelford were evacuated to a local leisure centre.

13:50 - Counter-terror police take over
By Sunday afternoon, Counter Terrorism Policing had confirmed it was leading the investigation. In a statement, it said the five men had been further arrested on suspicion of preparing a terrorist act. The investigation was still in its early stages, Deputy Assistant Commissioner Vicki Evans said, and the public was asked "to follow official channels for updates" and not to speculate.
At about 16:00 BST, [US] President Donald Trump told reporters the arrest of the five [men] was "fantastic" and "an amazing job".

At about noon on Monday, counter-terror police released more information on the five men who had been arrested - they were all from London and aged between 23-25. Counter Terrorism Policing said they were being held under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) and that a custody extension has been secured.

16:00 Monday - All five suspects released on bail
Counter-terror police announced that all five men would be released on police bail after "extensive interviews and enquiries". Assistant Commissioner Laurence Taylor stressed that the men were subject to "stringent conditions on their movement and contact with others." "They absolutely remain under investigation as we explore multiple lines of enquiry," Assistant Commissioner Laurence Taylor said.

18:00 Tuesday - Police say no explosive devices found
Counter-terror police gave another update on Tuesday evening, saying properties in London had been searched as part of the investigation. The three vehicles had also undergone an "extensive examination" with the support of military and forensic experts, Assistant Commissioner Taylor said. The Counter Terrorism Policing boss said that no improvised explosive devices were found in the vans, but a "quantity of petrol" was recovered.

Wednesday - New details emerge on first 999 call
Three days on, the BBC has learned that one of the men who had been arrested had made the first 999 call. It remains unclear why the man called police, or what he told them.
Also on Wednesday, Gloucestershire Police removed the cordon and reopened the scene.
