URL: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/andy-burnham-live-updates-labour-conference-speech-triple-lock-brexit-b3058722.html
The Independent live blog — Wednesday 30 September 2026, timestamp on page 08:16 BST (David Maddox, Political Editor, at Labour Party Conference in Liverpool; Athena Stavrou & Tom Barnes)

Andy Burnham latest: PM opens door to rejoining EU as he takes aim at Brexit after Labour conference speech

Andy Burnham has said he could go "all the way" and rejoin the European Union after he blamed Brexit for a "decade of drift and division" in the UK.
Asked whether he wanted the UK to rejoin the bloc, he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme he wanted to "look at the options". "We could stay as we are. That's definitely an option, if people think this is the right place to stay," he said.

-- Cost of living / Budget --
The Prime Minister told BBC Breakfast: "I'm considering everything that might help people in very difficult times and I will be honest and say every possible measure is being looked at.
"The question I've got is, 'how many can I afford?'
"'What can we do given the state of the public finances?'
"And people wouldn't thank me for making unfunded payments that then cause pressure on mortgages - and we've seen that in the past and we're not going back there."
Mr Burnham later added: "We will work hard to take that pressure off people's shoulders.
"But I would be the first to say it's hard - and the long-term answer is to put water under stronger public control - energy, housing reform, those are the long-term answers."

Treasury does not have 'huge room for manoeuvre', Burnham warns
Asked whether people should "expect to be better-off" after next month's Budget, Andy Burnham told BBC Breakfast: "We're thinking all of the time, 'how do we take a bit of pressure off people, give them some breathing space?'
"It's why one of the first decisions I took as prime minister was to remove VAT off electricity bills, and that will happen on Thursday."
Mr Burnham said the measure was "something, it's not everything".
He continued: "We'll do something to help people with bus fares next year, the £2 cap for the whole of the year, and then in the Budget we will consider further measures.
"It's important for me to say that we don't have huge room for manoeuvre.
"I think people can see that when they look at the financial picture, but within that we will do our best, and we'll also try to support people who are struggling with the cost of doing business 'cause it's hard to run a business right now as well."

National Care Service - detail to come
Speaking to Times Radio, the prime minister also said there was a "timing question" about when the service would be rolled out.
He told the broadcaster: "What I've announced at Labour party conference is the big vision - a national care service that can work to NHS principles because then you can have a system that works from home to hospital and back again, a more efficient way of providing care rather than two systems - and the big enabling decision that unlocks a national care service, which is the adjustment to the triple lock."
Mr Burnham vowed when the service is rolled out "it will be fully funded", adding: "We'll obviously make those proposals next year."
He said "there are options" to fully fund the scheme, saying: "You could obviously, if you wanted, put the time back, the date back, by which the service comes in.
"Because the triple lock decision will release the billions, more money will release as we go through the next decade, so there's obviously a timing question there."
He said he did not think he could introduce the service as late as 2040 "because the pressure on the NHS by that point - it's already intolerable".

Labour building case to put rejoin in its next manifesto
Ministers have told The Independent that Mr Burnham is building the case to put rejoin in the Labour manifesto at the next election. They have said it is now a question of "how it is expressed in the manifesto, rather than if".

What's on at Labour conference today?
There are speeches from four cabinet ministers on the stage:
- 9:45am: Angela Eagle, environment secretary
- 10:15 Yvette Cooper, health secretary
- 11am Lisa Nandy, culture secretary
- 12pm Lucy Powell, education secretary

Burnham 'knows what he believes in', McFadden says
Work and pensions secretary Pat McFadden told Sky News: "He laid out in a very personal way the direction in which he wants to lead the country and the way in which he wants to change the country.
"And as he said himself at the end of the speech, whether or not people agree with everything in it, they know that this is someone who knows what he believes in, knows where he wants to lead the country, and I think perhaps people have been missing that from politics for some time."
He added: "What I really liked about the speech was the combination of short-term things and long-term things in the speech, and his confidence in himself as a leader, because it's a very tough job. I've seen leadership up close. I've worked closely with all, really, all the Labour prime ministers in recent memory, and I know how tough that is. And you need a strong sense of yourself to do it successfully. And Andy Burnham showed that in spades yesterday."
