URL: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/andy-burnham-prime-minister-spain-emmanuel-macron-b3059221.html
The Independent — published Wednesday 30 September 2026, 17:19 BST (Sophie Wingate, PA)

Andy Burnham declines to rule out manifesto bid to rejoin EU
The Prime Minister said it was still his wish to see the UK back in the EU within his lifetime.

Andy Burnham has suggested it is "possible" Labour's next election manifesto could include an in-out referendum or even a pledge to rejoin the European Union.

The Prime Minister said "this isn't about leaping to a referendum" as he seeks to find a political consensus on the UK's future relationship with Brussels.
But, he said, if public opinion is "pointing towards" backing re-entry into the bloc, he could commit to holding a vote on the issue in the next manifesto.

Andy Burnham has acknowledged he could go "all the way" and propose rejoining the European Union as he considers the UK's future relationship with Brussels.
He also declined to rule out skipping a referendum and fighting the next general election on a promise to rejoin.

In his first Labour Party conference speech as leader, the Prime Minister said Brexit had done "more harm than good" and promised to set out the options to the country around the time of a UK-EU summit, which he said would be in November.

The Labour leader insisted he was not "leaping towards" any one option such as a referendum, telling the BBC: "I think we'd have to see where the options fell out, what people feel about them, and then, depending on what people seem to be pointing towards, what we then do."
But pressed on whether he could promise an in-out referendum after the next election, he said: "Yeah, things are possible."

Challenged over whether he could skip another referendum and put rejoining the EU in the manifesto, Mr Burnham told Channel 4 News: "I wouldn't rule anything out at this moment."

Before entering Downing Street, Mr Burnham had said he wanted to see the UK back in the EU within his lifetime.
Asked on Sky News whether he stood by that, he said: "I said in my lifetime and I've said that I'm not going to pull back from that."

A European Commission spokesperson said: "The UK is a close and valued partner of the European Union.
"It is for the UK Government to set out how it wishes to develop its relationship with the EU going forward.
"We remain open to engaging on the options it may put forward."
