URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/9/29/iraq-begins-high-stakes-security-balancing-act-as-us-troops-withdraw
Al Jazeera (approved). Date confirmed from URL path /2026/9/29/ and Exa metadata 2026-09-29. Byline Joseph Stepansky. Search highlights only (not a full fetch).

Iraq begins high-stakes security balancing act as US troops withdraw

Iraq is set to hold four "Sovereignty Days", a national holiday marking the complete withdrawal of US troops from the country and underscoring the deep symbolism of the exit after more than two decades of foreign intervention.

Wednesday's withdrawal deadline affirmed the exodus of a few hundred remaining US soldiers in the country, who have served in advisory roles in a coalition operation against ISIL (ISIS) first launched in 2015.

While the exit plan predates Prime Minister Ali al-Zaidi, it fits into his wider vision of reasserting Iraqi state authority. That encompasses accelerating efforts to disarm all militias in the country by June 2027, including several powerful pro-Iran groups who have launched attacks throughout the region amid the US-Israeli war with Iran.

Speaking at the United Nations General Assembly last week, al-Zaidi said his government was "striving to ensure that the state is the ultimate decision-maker in matters of peace and war, and that weapons and tools of power remain in the hands of its constitutional institutions".

Al-Zaidi: "With the end of the international coalition's mission in Iraq, we are moving our relationship with our strategic partners to a new phase, moving from military cooperation to economic and development cooperation in service of our common interests."

Remaining military personnel had consolidated at an airbase in Erbil, in northern Iraq's semi-autonomous Kurdish region, at the end of 2025. Al-Zaidi pushed back an initial September 30, 2026 deadline for militia disarmament to June 2027. Al-Zaidi told The New York Times earlier this month that both the US and Iran-aligned militias have given assurances they will refrain from any attacks for 90 days following the US withdrawal.
