URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmz7zxdy4gllo
BBC News — published 2026-09-28T18:04:41Z, confirmed from article metadata. Search highlights. NO NEW DEVELOPMENT FOUND for 29-30 September.
"Mahmood signals rethink on migrants right to remain"
Home Secretary Shabana Mahmood has signalled she is willing to rethink plans to make it harder for foreign workers to claim permanent residence. In her conference speech she acknowledged "some have said elements of these reforms are not fair" and said the government would "come to a position that balances fairness for those who came here legally and fairness to British citizens across this country".
Proposals: double the qualifying time for most migrants from five to 10 years; health and social care visa arrivals would face a 15-year wait; those relying on benefits for more than 12 months a 20-year wait.
ANDREA EGAN, general secretary, Unison: the proposed changes would unfairly penalise overseas care workers.
Home Office sources insist NO FINAL DECISION on changes to the immigration rules has been taken; Mahmood was setting out guiding principles.
MAHMOOD (verbatim, to delegates): "As we restore control and fairness to our asylum system, we must do the same for legal migration too. Fair to those who seek a new and better life here, like my parents did, and fair to those already here, including British workers, and especially the young. That same principle underpins my reforms to the right to live here indefinitely, ensuring settled status is earned by those who have shown a consistent commitment to this country."
BURNHAM denied Mahmood had been forced to ditch the plans because Rayner viewed them as "un-British", saying the reforms would need to "strike the right balance".
Related (BBC, 2026-09-26T09:47:25Z, https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmx2zz035q99o): Mahmood told the Home Affairs Committee she was "very aware that a large group of people who arrived in 2022, absent any change, would qualify in February 2027" and "Later this year we will set out the new policy on settlement... as well as any transitional arrangements we might decide to implement." Mahmood said the government would decide on the immigration overhaul by the end of the year.
