URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cqn8m342rgk9o
BBC News (Daniel Sandford) — published 2026-09-30T00:12:24Z, confirmed from article metadata. Search highlights.
"One of the five men arrested near RAF Fairford called 999 himself"
One of the five men arrested near RAF Fairford in the early hours of Sunday had dialled 999 himself, the BBC understands. The suspect called police at 00:45 BST, almost an hour before a female farmer also dialled 999 after seeing men in balaclavas. Police were alerted to "three suspicious vehicles" in Whelford, a village directly east of the base, by the farmer.
The five were arrested on suspicion of explosives offences and later terrorism offences after three vans were spotted. Released on bail on Monday in what police described as an "investigative decision" "grounded in experience and strategy".
The five men are all UK nationals aged between 23 and 25. Four live in Westminster and one in Camden. Searches of their homes are now complete.
POLICE CORDONS near the base are expected to be COMPLETELY LIFTED ON WEDNESDAY [30 September]; residents from the 85 homes evacuated on Sunday have been allowed to return to their properties.
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER LAURENCE TAYLOR, head of Counter Terrorism Policing, to reporters on Tuesday: the police response that morning had been due to "a range of information". "The safety of the public is at the forefront of our investigative decision-making, and this was certainly the case yesterday." "I understand why this development was surprising to some, but I would like to reiterate that this is an investigative decision and one which is grounded in experience and strategy." Bail is "subject to stringent conditions on their movement and contact with others". Officers are exploring "multiple lines of inquiry", including whether proxies or individuals knowingly or unknowingly working on behalf of a foreign state were involved.
DONALD TRUMP, on Tuesday, told journalists he was "disappointed" the five men had been released on bail.
NO CHARGES; no suspect named; no motive stated.
