URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cve8x724e9ezo
BBC News — published 2026-09-29T17:39:06Z, confirmed from article metadata returned with the page. Search highlights.
"Burnham vows to end existing pension triple lock in 2030 to help fund care"
Burnham will end the existing state pension triple lock from 2030 to help fund a new national care service. Plans would see the state pension increase every year at least by inflation or 2.5% but remove the automatic annual link with average earnings. Triple lock stays until 2030, then "adjust it".
BURNHAM (verbatim): "The state pension will continue to rise every year at least by prices or 2.5%. And it will hold its value relative to earnings over time so that pensioners will always share in the rising prosperity of the nation. But this change will generate significant savings which we will use to build up our national care service. Some may not realise it but older people with nothing more than the state pension, or only a little more, can find themselves paying care changes today from that small income. Under my plan, this will no longer happen."
Burnham accepted he may "pay a political price" but "someone has to go through the pain barrier and rip the plaster off". Called the national care service a "landmark" policy that would be "as significant as the creation of the NHS itself and utterly essential to securing its future"; said it would be "fully funded and not through borrowing".
Officials have suggested the change could save £15bn a year by 2040.
JONATHAN CRIBB, deputy director, IFS: savings "are likely to be relatively small in the first few years, but rise substantially over time"; "we should not expect this reform to save enough that it could fund universal social care in the next parliament".
SHARON GRAHAM, general secretary, Unite: told the BBC the government should have "pulled another lever", such as a wealth tax.
KEMI BADENOCH (Con leader): "more tax rises are inevitable".
NIGEL FARAGE (Reform UK): accused the PM of "launching an offensive against our elderly".
SIR ED DAVEY (Lib Dem leader): families "cannot wait until after another election and it can't be funded from the pockets of our poorest pensioners".
