URL: https://ifs.org.uk/articles/how-will-new-triple-lock-work-and-what-effects-will-it-have
Institute for Fiscal Studies (primary/official) — "Published on 29 September 2026", confirmed from the in-page publication line. Search highlights.
"How will the new triple lock work and what effects will it have?"
Reform comes into effect in 2030-31. Triple lock introduced in 2011. Under the NEW mechanism, each year the state pension will increase by the maximum of:
- CPI inflation;
- 2.5%;
- the amount needed to ensure the state pension keeps up with average earnings growth SINCE THE INTRODUCTION OF THE NEW POLICY.
Key difference: the new lock generates only a temporary period in which state pensions are higher relative to average earnings; it does not permanently ratchet up the level of the state pension.
"We have estimated that the old triple lock has increased annual state pension expenditure by £16 billion by 2026-27 compared with indexation in line with average earnings growth. If the new triple lock had been in place instead, expenditure in 2026-27 would be £9 billion lower than it currently is."
"if the new triple lock had been in place between 2010 and 2026, the state pension would still have risen in real terms (i.e. faster than inflation) by 6%."
Criticism: the 2.5% minimum "is an arbitrary minimum increase that does nothing to protect state pensions against inflation or help them keep up with average earnings"; it "does not generate a permanently higher state pension, but it does lead to considerably higher spending over a long period of time". A "smoothed earnings link" (proposed by the IFS Pensions Review among others) would be the same without the 2.5% floor.
Conclusion: "The savings to the Exchequer from this reform are likely to be relatively small in the first few years. However, over time the new triple lock will prevent the state pension being locked into an ever-increasing level of generosity compared with workers' earnings, thereby generating significant savings in the long run."
