URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/10/4/police-investigating-flydubai-co-pilots-australia-ties

Police investigating Flydubai co-pilot’s Australia ties | Aviation News | Al Jazeera     
								
					                      Listen (2 mins) Save
Authorities have said they are investigating the links of the co-pilot of the Israel-bound Flydubai flight with Australia.
A multi-agency Australian police and intelligence team – the Victorian Joint Counter Terrorism Team – is carrying out the probe, a spokesperson said on Sunday.
list 1 of 3Flydubai co-pilot attacked captain with crash axe in ‘terrorist act’: UAE
list 2 of 3Who is the mystery co-pilot behind the Flydubai attack?
list 3 of 3What we know about the co-pilot accused in Flydubai attack
Mystery surrounds the co-pilot, who is accused of attacking the captain with an axe and attempting to seize control of Flight FZ1073 from Dubai as it approached Israel, and how he was able to acquire his seat in the plane’s cockpit.
He has been identified in media reports as Omani national Hamam al-Hammami.
He had been barred from flying in his own country because of concerns that he had adopted “extremist” views, The Associated Press news agency cited sources as saying.
While al-Hammami reportedly spent part of his life in the United Arab Emirates, the Reuters news agency, citing sources briefed on the Australian investigation, reported that he studied at a university in the Australian city of Melbourne.
A third unnamed source told the agency that he studied at RMIT University, a public research university in Melbourne, about a decade ago.
The Financial Times also reported al-Hammami’s links to Australia. Citing two sources familiar with the Australian investigation, the FT said al-Hammami had allegedly visited what it described as “radical mosques and extremist websites” while in the country.
Disaster was averted after passengers and crew subdued the co-pilot and a reserve pilot took over its controls and completed an emergency landing in Saudi Arabia.
However, the case has raised questions about security in Israel, which has some of the world’s strictest aviation security measures.
The prosecutor general of the UAE, Hamad Saif al-Shamsi, has labelled the attack an attempted “terrorist act”.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has said that Israel has longstanding arrangements with foreign airlines aimed at preventing pilots who are nationals of countries without diplomatic relations with Israel from flying there.
Netanyahu said a “loophole” appears to have allowed the Omani pilot to take part in the Flydubai flight, and that Israel would now strengthen its checks.
The UAE has not yet publicly established a motive or announced whether investigators believe al-Hammami acted alone.
UAE presidential adviser Anwar Gargash said on Saturday that the latest “terrorist” attack is a new warning that the region’s fight against “extremism” is not over.
