URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/10/4/ukraine-ready-for-us-backed-talks-with-russia-zelenskyy

Ukraine ready for US-backed talks with Russia: Zelenskyy | Russia-Ukraine war News | Al Jazeera     
								
					                       Listen (2 mins) Save
Ukraine is ready to hold trilateral talks with the United States and Russia this month, President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has said.
The Ukrainian president made the comments on Sunday during a news conference alongside German Chancellor Friedrich Merz in Kyiv. He said Ukraine supports a swift timeline for returning to talks to try to end the war fought for over four and a half years.
list 1 of 3Russia’s Putin rules out ceasefire with Ukraine during speech in Moscow
list 2 of 3Row between Ukraine, South Korea mounts over North Korean POWs
list 3 of 3Russia tries to freeze Ukraine as it suffers record casualties and retreats
US efforts to broker a ceasefire have been paused since Washington launched its war on Iran. However, Washington is now pushing for technical-level talks by the end of October, Zelenskyy said.
He confirmed earlier reports that the United Arab Emirates, which has hosted previous talks, could again be the setting for a meeting.
“I confirmed to [the US] that our side is ready to support this timeline,” Zelenskyy said, adding that Kyiv is open to meeting in the UAE or “another country proposed by the American side”.
Washington had also been in touch with Moscow about the plan, Zelenskyy said. The Kremlin said last month that it did not rule out the possibility of three-way talks this month.
Despite suggestions of their willingness to discuss an end to the conflict, both Russia and Ukraine have also said they will ramp up long-range attacks on military and related targets.
Moscow has said it is targeting Ukraine’s energy sector as winter approaches. Last year, similar attacks knocked out power and heating for days on end as temperatures plummeted to minus 20C.
Zelenskyy on Sunday said he was “amazed” by Russia’s “savage desire to escalate the situation every day”.
He yet again accused Moscow of targeting “civilian infrastructure, including data centres and mobile network facilities”.
“Honestly speaking, I am not surprised by this approach to the war – by Russia’s hatred towards Ukraine – but I am surprised by the specific tactics used”, the Ukrainian leader said.
Alongside the return of the US to efforts to broker a ceasefire, India on Sunday said that it aims to step up its efforts to play a larger role in mediating an end to the conflict.
Speaking at the Munich Security Conference in New Delhi, Foreign Minister Subrahmanyam Jaishankar said his country had become more involved in recent months, specifically regarding shipping in the Black Sea, which has been plagued by mines and attacks on commercial vessels.
India was also “going beyond that,” said Jaishankar, including with discussions on grain and energy exports and “on non-attack possibilities,” he said.
