URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/oct/04/brazil-presidential-election-lula-flavio-bolsonaro

Skip to main contentSkip to navigation     Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (left) is seeking a fourth term, with the far-right senator Flávio Bolsonaro standing in his way. Composite: Isabella Finholdt/NurPhoto/Shutterstock, Douglas Shineidr/Getty View image in fullscreen Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (left) is seeking a fourth term, with the far-right senator Flávio Bolsonaro standing in his way. Composite: Isabella Finholdt/NurPhoto/Shutterstock, Douglas Shineidr/GettyBrazilPolls close in first round of Brazil’s high-stakes presidential election
Leftwing incumbent Lula trying to fight off close rival Flávio Bolsonaro, far-right son of jailed ex-president
The polls have closed in the first round of Brazil’s highly polarised and high-stakes presidential election that could change not only the direction of Latin America’s largest country but that of the entire region.
The election pits the leftwing president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who is seeking a fourth non-consecutive term, against the far-right senator Flávio Bolsonaro, an ally of Donald Trump and the son of the former president Jair Bolsonaro, who is serving a 27-year sentence for attempting a coup after his failed 2022 re-election attempt.
Late on Sunday Bolsonaro was leading Lula in partial results. With results in from almost 65% of the country, Bolsonaro had 49.8% to Lula’s 42.25%, while several other candidates stood in the single digits.
Lula and Bolsonaro have alternated as frontrunners in the final stretch, making the outcome unpredictable. In recent days both have focused on persuading undecided voters in hopes of reaching 50% plus one vote; if neither does, there will be a runoff on 25 October.
Brazil is one of the few Latin American countries that still has a leftwing government after a wave of rightwing and far-right electoral victories across the region and the US takeover of Venezuela after the capture of Nicolás Maduro.
The 80-year-old Lula has positioned himself as one of the last regional leaders still willing to say no to Trump, and has recently accused the US president of trying to interfere in Brazil’s election in Bolsonaro’s favour.
View image in fullscreen Lula embraces a child as he leaves a polling station in São Bernardo do Campo after casting his vote on Sunday. Photograph: Alexandre Meneghini/ReutersLike his father, who was Brazil’s president during Trump’s first term, Flávio Bolsonaro, 45, frequently praises the US president and has pledged to join the US-led anti-drug-cartel coalition that has killed dozens of people in airstrikes and carried out military operations across the region.
Voting on Sunday morning in São Bernardo do Campo, the industrial city where his political career began nearly half a century ago, Lula said: “People will have to choose between strengthening democracy and barbarism.” The incumbent played down polls released on Saturday that showed the race was wide open – they suggested either candidate could finish ahead and force a runoff, or even win outright on Sunday. “The poll that matters will be carried out today,” he said.
View image in fullscreen Flávio Bolsonaro with his wife, Fernanda, after voting in Rio de Janeiro. Photograph: Silvia Izquierdo/APFlávio Bolsonaro, who voted in Rio de Janeiro’s north zone, urged supporters of other rightwing candidates to switch to him in a “protest vote”. “Our internal polls show people who would have voted for other candidates, who are also against Lula, already voting for Flávio Bolsonaro … I hope it’s enough to give us victory in the first round,” he said.
Claudinei Ferreira Viana, 45, a workshop manager in Pinhais in Paraná state, is one of the senator’s supporters. “My first choice would be Jair Bolsonaro but, since he is under house arrest and there is no other rightwing candidate strong enough to take on the current president, I’m going with Flávio,” he said.
3:43  How Trump is meddling in Brazil’s election – explainerAt the beginning of the year, polls suggested Bolsonaro voters would have preferred a ticket led by the São Paulo governor, Tarcísio de Freitas, or the former first lady Michelle Bolsonaro. But the former president chose his eldest son.
The campaign was also marked by a scandal in which the senator was caught on tape asking a banker accused of corruption for $26.8m (£20m) to fund a film about his father, as well as speculation that Bolsonaro might strip the country’s widely cherished patron saint of her status, but he has nevertheless remained highly competitive.
View image in fullscreen Flávio Bolsonaro during an open-top campaign parade through the Campo Grande district of Rio de Janeiro on Saturday. Photograph: Bruna Prado/APFor many analysts, that reflects a combination of a straightforward transfer of his father’s voter base – Jair Bolsonaro lost to Lula by less than two percentage points in 2022 – and an anti-Lula vote, with the president still facing high rejection rates despite strong social and economic indicators.
The incumbent’s campaign has also been hit by corruption allegations – still under investigation – involving his son and a former aide, as well as a scandal involving supreme court justices, which, despite having no connection to Lula, is seen as fuelling an “anti-system” vote and by extension an anti-incumbent one.
View image in fullscreen Lula parading through São Paulo on Saturday. Photograph: Sebastião Moreira/EPABrazilians will also elect 27 state governors, members of state legislatures, all 513 federal congress members and 54 of the country’s 81 senators in Sunday’s vote.
AMC, 40, who asked to be identified only by her initials because she fears reprisals from the local conservative government where she works in the interior of Amazonas state, will vote for Lula on Sunday “because of the many programmes he created to support the most vulnerable groups”.
“Jair Bolsonaro weakened protections for Indigenous peoples, and everything Lula has done over the past four years to strengthen those protections and protect the Amazon would be seriously threatened if his son came to power,” she said.
Brazil’s neck-and-neck election offers test for growing pro-Trump Latin American bloc
Brazil’s Lula says only he can stop rise of fascism under Bolsonaro’s son
‘No one disrespects Our Lady’: fears for Brazil’s patron saint grip country ahead of election
Today in FocusThe Bolsonaros … they’re back! Brazil heads to the polls – podcast
Brazil attorney general says meddling ‘cannot be tolerated’ after Trump funding plans revealed
Trump administration diverts human rights funds to push far-right agenda abroad
The Guardian view on Lula v the Bolsonaros: the decision of Brazilian voters will affect us all
How Trump is meddling in Brazil's election – explainer
‘We’re afraid of dying’: Brazilian news site will not cover upcoming elections after threats
