URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cqm249v07j4xo

Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, A pro-government soldier standing guard on a street in Ethiopia's Tigray region on Sunday
Rebel forces in Ethiopia's northern Tigray region have said they have temporarily withdrawn from the regional capital, Mekelle, as fighting with the national army moves towards the city.
The Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF), which has been running the region, said its decision to relocate was made because of concerns about risks to civilians.
Two residents in Mekelle told the BBC that pro-government forces now control the city and TPLF forces have abandoned it. One resident also said mobile phone services appear to have resumed in parts of the city.
Fighting has erupted in recent weeks between the TPLF and federal government forces alongside allied fighters in parts of Ethiopia's northern regions of Tigray, Afar and Amhara.
The development marks a major shift in the conflict and raises concerns among observers that the fighting could further destabilise the Horn of Africa, potentially drawing in neighbouring countries.
The US Department of State called for "restraint" and "dialogue" on all sides ahead of a diplomatic meeting about the conflict in Egypt on Sunday with leaders from some of Ethiopia's neighbours.
How fresh fighting in Tigray could spark wider conflict in Ethiopia
Tigray residents have been trying to recover from a devastating two-year civil war that ended in 2022 when the African Union (AU) brokered a peace deal, known as the Pretoria Agreement, between the two sides.
However, in the last six months there has been a worsening of relations, with both sides accusing each other of violating the agreement.
Last month, the TPLF joined six other armed movements, including the Fano militia from Amhara, to form an alliance whose stated objective is to remove Ethiopia's Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed's government from power.
The civil war was one of the most deadly conflicts this century - the AU's mediator estimated some 600,000 people died as the fighting drove the region to the precipice of famine.
On Friday, neighbours Ethiopia and Eritrea severed diplomatic relations with each other after Addis Ababa accused Asmara of supporting a new rebel alliance - an allegation that it denied.
Ethiopia has also accused Egypt of supporting the rebels, leading to the expulsion of an Egyptian diplomat, which Cairo responded to by ordering an Ethiopian embassy official to leave within the same period.
The United Nations has warned that the deteriorating security situation in northern Ethiopia is severely disrupting humanitarian work and has called on all sides to guarantee safe and unhindered access to people in need.
Ethiopia and Eritrea cut diplomatic ties as northern conflict escalates
Ethiopia fighting escalates in Tigray killing 52 civilians, medic tells the BBC
The young women who fought in Ethiopia's last civil war and don't want to see another one
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:31Rare tornado whips through small Australian town. 00:00:31, play videoRare tornado whips through small Australian town
0:51How can the UK face drought and floods at same time? 00:00:51, play videoHow can the UK face drought and floods at same time?
0:59'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments. 00:00:59, play video'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments
1:31'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians. 00:01:31, play video'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians
1:27How AI can boost your chances of finding a new job. 00:01:27, play videoHow AI can boost your chances of finding a new job
1:27A love story born during World War II. 00:01:27, play videoA love story born during World War II
0:45'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift. 00:00:45, play video'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift
1:08New sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking. 00:01:08, play videoNew sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking
1:19Have you heard about this 90 second rule? 00:01:19, play videoHave you heard about this 90 second rule?
1:25Men in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community. 00:01:25, play videoMen in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community
1:22Why students and riot police are clashing in Paris. 00:01:22, play videoWhy students and riot police are clashing in Paris
1:19Photos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators. 00:01:19, play videoPhotos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators
1:04Flydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot. 00:01:04, play videoFlydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot
1:15Teammates hailed after saving footballer's life. 00:01:15, play videoTeammates hailed after saving footballer's life
0:42Polanski calls for three-year cap on rents. 00:00:42, play videoPolanski calls for three-year cap on rents
1:28Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever? 00:01:28, play videoBiggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever?
1:01‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
'Money-grab' or celebration? NFL kicks off London series
The Papers: Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
When parenting advice becomes too much
The Celebrity Traitors connections that might surprise you
The Kent village that helped shape Audrey Hepburn
I was told my baby boy's skin was as fragile as glass
The hidden daytime dance revolution - and the man who captured it on camera
Why thousands of couples are choosing Scotland to say 'I do'
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
2Girl, 12, fatally shot in US during 'dispute over parking space'
3Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
4Protesters gather as migrants brought ashore on south coast
5Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
6Christa Pike's prognosis still unclear after failed execution, lawyer says
7Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
8British Museum announces changes to ease Bayeux Tapestry queues
9Yemen's government announces all-out war to reclaim land from Houthis
10Why Canada is wargaming a (long shot) US invasion
