URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/crq5nd9dgz68o

Figure caption, Justice secretary vows courts backlog will reduce
The courts backlog will still fall despite plans to curb jury trials being scrapped, the justice secretary has told the BBC.
Alex Norris said introducing legislation for judge-only trials "was always going to be the most complicated to implement" and would have slowed down reforms.
Prime Minister Andy Burnham's decision abandons proposals introduced by Sir Keir Starmer's government to allow judges in England and Wales to make the sole decision on cases that would lead to a sentence of less than three years.
The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) said only complex fraud and financial offences would be judge-only - and it proposes thousands of medium-level crimes should stay with volunteer magistrates, who sit without a jury.
Norris told the BBC's Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg the backlog would start falling "in this Parliament", but would not say by how much.
He said it would fall significantly over the next decade "as a result of the changes we're making".
The Conservatives said it was a "major victory" for those who fought to defend trial by jury, while criminal lawyers welcomed the decision but voiced concern about the implications of abolishing a defendant's right to ask for a jury trial.
The Criminal Bar Association (CBA) warned this would keep more middle-ranking cases before magistrates and shift 25,000 cases a year onto magistrates' courts.
Former justice secretary David Lammy first announced the plans to curb jury trials in December following a recommendation in a major review of the court system in England and Wales.
The series of radical reforms, including scaling back jury trials, were presented as the best way of turning around record backlogs which, in turn, were exacerbating the prison population crisis.
The backlog - which has led to record delays for defendants and victims - currently stands at nearly 81,000 cases, having rocketed largely thanks to cuts before the pandemic and court closures during national lockdowns.
Image source, Andrew Aitchison / In pictures via Getty ImagesOfficial projections have estimated it could reach 100,000 before the next general election and, in a worst-case scenario, climb to double that number by 2035.
There are, however, indications the backlog is now stabilising after the government committed unlimited funding to pay for more judges to sit in courts that were otherwise being unused.
Under the original plans, Lammy had wanted to reserve jury trials for the most serious "indictable" offences - meaning cases that are always sent to Crown Court, including murder and rape.
Less serious offences, where the sentence would be no more than three years, would be decided without a jury in the Crown Court by a judge alone. Even less serious offences than that would stay in magistrates' courts, abolishing the right of defendants to ask for a trial by jury when they feel that is their best chance of being cleared.
The proposals triggered an outcry across many parts of the criminal justice world, with many opponents saying eroding the 800-year-old right to trial by jury would not solve the backlogs.
Norris earlier said that he remained committed to bringing down the backlog and delivering swifter justice.
But he added: "I have heard the strength of feeling on the proposals for increasing the number of judge-alone trials in the Crown Court and have made the decision to change course.
"This allows us to start that work far earlier, ensuring that under this government we do not have victims waiting endlessly for justice.
"Justice delayed is justice denied, and I am committed to maximising efficiencies in our system alongside record investment. I remain committed to structural reform which is crucial if we are to bring down the backlog."
Image source, PA MediaImage caption, Old Bailey: All Crown Courts hear trials by jury
Andrew Thomas KC - chairman of the Criminal Bar Association, which represents barristers who work in crown and magistrates courts - said the profession was "delighted".
"Justice needs juries," he said. "Nothing inspires more public trust than 12 ordinary citizens from all walks of life deciding the facts of a case together.
"We are also pleased that the government is going ahead with important changes in the bill to protect victims and witnesses at trial. These include new powers to prevent unfair questioning about a complainant's behaviour and to support witnesses to give their best evidence."
But Thomas warned plans to keep more middle-ranking cases before magistrates could backfire - not least because of a shortage of magistrates.
"The proposal to strip defendants of their right to elect a crown court trial, combined with doubling magistrates' sentencing powers to two years, would shift 25,000 cases a year - including 5,500 jury trials - out of the crown court," he said.
"These are not minor offences. It includes serious and sensitive cases including assaults, sexual assaults, child abuse and grievous bodily harm. Our volunteer magistrates do an excellent job but they are completely unequipped to try complex, multi-day trials.
"It would be a car crash if they tried to do it, especially at this time."
Claire Waxman, victims' commissioner for England and Wales, said victims were "being asked to place their faith in a plan that ministers themselves argued would not be [enough]".
Barrister Karl Turner, a Labour MP who was suspended from the parliamentary party after he criticised the government's plans to reform jury trials, thanked Burnham "for his support during my campaign".
Shadow justice secretary Nick Timothy said: "This is a major victory for everyone who fought to defend trial by jury, and Conservatives led that fight from day one. Labour have been forced to abandon its central attack on jury trials in the Crown Court."
Liberal Democrat justice spokeswoman Jess Brown-Fully added the proposal "should never have been introduced in the first place", while Green MP Sian Berry said it was "a victory for justice and fairness".
Have you been affected by the issues raised in this story? Get in touch.
How did the courts backlog get so bad?
Court backlog will continue to rise even with new reforms, Lammy says
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:31Rare tornado whips through small Australian town. 00:00:31, play videoRare tornado whips through small Australian town
0:51How can the UK face drought and floods at same time? 00:00:51, play videoHow can the UK face drought and floods at same time?
0:59'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments. 00:00:59, play video'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments
1:31'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians. 00:01:31, play video'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians
1:27How AI can boost your chances of finding a new job. 00:01:27, play videoHow AI can boost your chances of finding a new job
1:27A love story born during World War II. 00:01:27, play videoA love story born during World War II
0:45'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift. 00:00:45, play video'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift
1:08New sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking. 00:01:08, play videoNew sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking
1:19Have you heard about this 90 second rule? 00:01:19, play videoHave you heard about this 90 second rule?
1:25Men in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community. 00:01:25, play videoMen in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community
1:22Why students and riot police are clashing in Paris. 00:01:22, play videoWhy students and riot police are clashing in Paris
1:19Photos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators. 00:01:19, play videoPhotos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators
1:04Flydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot. 00:01:04, play videoFlydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot
1:15Teammates hailed after saving footballer's life. 00:01:15, play videoTeammates hailed after saving footballer's life
0:42Polanski calls for three-year cap on rents. 00:00:42, play videoPolanski calls for three-year cap on rents
1:28Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever? 00:01:28, play videoBiggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever?
1:01‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
'Money-grab' or celebration? NFL kicks off London series
The Papers: Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
When parenting advice becomes too much
The Celebrity Traitors connections that might surprise you
The Kent village that helped shape Audrey Hepburn
I was told my baby boy's skin was as fragile as glass
The hidden daytime dance revolution - and the man who captured it on camera
Why thousands of couples are choosing Scotland to say 'I do'
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
2Girl, 12, fatally shot in US during 'dispute over parking space'
3Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
4Protesters gather as migrants brought ashore on south coast
5Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
6Christa Pike's prognosis still unclear after failed execution, lawyer says
7Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
8British Museum announces changes to ease Bayeux Tapestry queues
9Yemen's government announces all-out war to reclaim land from Houthis
10Why Canada is wargaming a (long shot) US invasion
