URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cx7vp6d5pgn1o

ByBrian WheelerPolitical reporterPublished4 October 2026
Kemi Badenoch has declared herself a "classic old school Conservative" as she begins her party's annual conference with a string of policy pledges and a 100 page statement on her guiding principles., external
"I believe in common sense, people working hard and being rewarded for that effort," she told the BBC's Laura Kuenssberg.
She added that welfare should be a "safety net, not a lifestyle".
The Tory leader is trying to ensure her party stands out in a crowded political field. The Conservatives are trailing Labour and Reform UK in the opinion polls and have yet to recover from their historic defeat at the 2024 general election.
Badenoch, whose personal poll ratings are higher than that of her party, has characterised Reform leader Nigel Farage as a "grumpy grandpa" and she told Laura Kuenssberg that Labour leader Andy Burnham is "the cheesy uncle who does all the dad jokes".
She described herself as a "no-nonsense mum".
Asked if her plan for benefit cuts and a massive increase in prison places was a return to the "nasty party" of the past, she said: "It's the common sense party. That's what we're doing.
"And, quite frankly, if we were doing so well the old way, then why did we have such a terrible issue in 2024?"
In her essay The Right Way - a deliberate echo of an essay written by Margaret Thatcher in 1976, external entitled The Right Approach - Badenoch says the last Conservative government failed because it did not know what it stood for.
Despite the party's rhetoric during its 14 years in power, she said: "We did little to reverse the structural changes Labour had made which took the country in the wrong direction.
"The result was that the state grew by stealth."
The essay says the "next Conservative government will have one central principle: business, not government, creates growth".
The Tories would achieve growth through tax cuts, cutting red tape and reducing the size of the civil service back to pre-pandemic levels, the essay says.
And it adds: "What is really missing from politics and government today is people prepared to say no.
"Political parties now need to recruit those who have the stomach to say no to good causes when the resources simply are not there to do everything."
Image source, ReutersImage caption, An 88 foot long satirical take on the Bayeaux Tapestry poking fun at Labour and Reform UK is a popular attraction at the Tory conference
As their conference gets under way in Birmingham the Conservatives have pledged to end a childcare "cliff edge", which currently means parents earning more than £100,000 do not qualify for the entitlement.
The party has also promised to deliver 50,000 new prison places by slashing the overseas aid budget to £1bn a year in a bid to end the early release of offenders.
Over the 14 years the Conservatives were in power, around 500 net prison places were created, which takes into account 14,142 added in existing and new jails, set against 13,660 lost mainly to dilapidation and closures.
Speaking in the main conference hall, Badenoch sought to make the case that the party had moved on from 2024 and outlined her expectation that the next few days in Birmingham would be a chance for members to discuss their ideas.
She said: "We're going to be having debates, we're going to have arguments, they are going to be fun.
"We're going to challenge each other and afterwards we're still going to be a united party."
During a question and answer session, Badenoch focused on different topics covered in her essay – including citizenship and how communities need to operate on trust.
She said the UK is "not a dormitory, it is not a hotel" before speaking how "British culture means something".
To applause in the well-attended hall, Badenoch said: "I don't want lots of little ghettos of separatist communities where they are recreating the place they come from - that will ruin the United Kingdom."
Responding, Labour Party chair Bridget Phillipson said the Tory Party "is stuck in the past and remains completely out of touch with what people across Britain want to see".
"Last week Andy Burnham set out a plan to bring back hope to Britain. Kemi Badenoch wants to drag our country back to a politics that let so many people down over the past 40 years."
Badenoch unveils plan to end £100,000 childcare 'cliff edge' ahead of Tory conference
Tories aim to be election-ready ahead of party conference
Sign up for our Politics Essential newsletter to keep up with the inner workings of Westminster and beyond.
Conservative Party Conference
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:31Rare tornado whips through small Australian town. 00:00:31, play videoRare tornado whips through small Australian town
0:51How can the UK face drought and floods at same time? 00:00:51, play videoHow can the UK face drought and floods at same time?
0:59'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments. 00:00:59, play video'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments
1:31'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians. 00:01:31, play video'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians
1:27How AI can boost your chances of finding a new job. 00:01:27, play videoHow AI can boost your chances of finding a new job
1:27A love story born during World War II. 00:01:27, play videoA love story born during World War II
0:45'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift. 00:00:45, play video'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift
1:08New sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking. 00:01:08, play videoNew sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking
1:19Have you heard about this 90 second rule? 00:01:19, play videoHave you heard about this 90 second rule?
1:25Men in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community. 00:01:25, play videoMen in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community
1:22Why students and riot police are clashing in Paris. 00:01:22, play videoWhy students and riot police are clashing in Paris
1:19Photos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators. 00:01:19, play videoPhotos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators
1:04Flydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot. 00:01:04, play videoFlydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot
1:15Teammates hailed after saving footballer's life. 00:01:15, play videoTeammates hailed after saving footballer's life
0:42Polanski calls for three-year cap on rents. 00:00:42, play videoPolanski calls for three-year cap on rents
1:28Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever? 00:01:28, play videoBiggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever?
1:01‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
'Money-grab' or celebration? NFL kicks off London series
The Papers: Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
When parenting advice becomes too much
The Celebrity Traitors connections that might surprise you
The Kent village that helped shape Audrey Hepburn
I was told my baby boy's skin was as fragile as glass
The hidden daytime dance revolution - and the man who captured it on camera
Why thousands of couples are choosing Scotland to say 'I do'
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
2Girl, 12, fatally shot in US during 'dispute over parking space'
3Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
4Protesters gather as migrants brought ashore on south coast
5Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
6Christa Pike's prognosis still unclear after failed execution, lawyer says
7Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
8British Museum announces changes to ease Bayeux Tapestry queues
9Yemen's government announces all-out war to reclaim land from Houthis
10Why Canada is wargaming a (long shot) US invasion
