URL: https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2026/oct/04/conservatives-tories-conference-kemi-badenoch-james-cleverly-labour-jury-trials-green-party-zionism-uk-politics-latest-news-updates

Skip to main contentSkip to navigation Skip to key events Politics live with Andrew SparrowPoliticsAs it happened: Israel condemns Green party passing ‘Zionism is racism’ as a ‘stain on history of UK’
Party formally adopts policy which equates Zionism with racism, as all Green party votes to adopt policy that equates Zionism with racism
Zack Polanski at the conference in Brighton last week. Photograph: Phil Lewis/SOPA Images/Shutterstock View image in fullscreen Zack Polanski at the conference in Brighton last week. Photograph: Phil Lewis/SOPA Images/Shutterstock Andrew SparrowSun 4 Oct 2026 17.32 BSTFirst published on Sun 4 Oct 2026 08.22 BSTShare  From 11h ago
The Israeli foreign ministry has issued a statement condemning the Green party in the light of today’s vote, Tom Scotson from the Sun reports.
In the statement, the foreign ministry said:
The shocking resolution adopted today legitimises armed struggle, calls for a Palestinian state “from the river to the sea” - meaning the destruction of the State of Israel - and labels as “racist” the aspiration of the Jewish people for self-determination.
This goes far beyond the boundaries of legitimate political debate. As long as this resolution remains in place, it will stand as a stain on the history of the United Kingdom.
The Greens in England and Wales have formally adopted a policy that equates Zionism with racism and calls for Israel to be replaced by a single Palestinian state.
Kemi Badenoch, the Conservative leader, has opened her party’s conference by publishing a short book setting out her political philosophy. As the Press Association reports, a major line of thought throughout Badenoch’s new political bible appears to be that government should not spread its resources too thinly, but should be strong in the areas in which “the state is required”: defence, borders, public order, the rule of law and essential infrastructure. Badenoch told the conference:
There is always an emergency. There is always a good reason to spend government money or time on something, but we don’t have unlimited resources. Government is about making tough choices, deciding how you will spread your resources, what you are going to focus your time on.
The “fundamental analysis” at the heart of the document is that government needs to create the conditions for economic growth, and then get out of the way to allow businesses “the freedom to grow our economy”, the Tory leader added.
Damian Green, the former first secretary of state, has told a fringe meeting that revising the pensions triple lock to make it less generous makes sense. He said:
The mechanical straitjacket of the traditional triple lock seems to me no longer desirable.
And, of course, you have to look at the consequences for the public finances for everything we’re discussing - as we have a population more and more skewed towards those receiving the state pension, then it will become inexorably more expensive.
So tax cuts, or desirable spending on, which I’m sure people in this room would like, on things like defence, become that much more difficult [if the triple lock stays].
Nigel Farage has been interviewed by the standards commissioner for an investigation into whether he should have declared a £5m gift from the crypto billionaire Christopher Harborne.
Alex Norris, the justice secretary, has been unable to say how many prisoners freed early from jail this week have been tagged, despite previous reassurances from the justice department.
For a full list of all the stories covered on the blog today, do scroll through the list of key event headlines near the top of the blog.
View image in fullscreen Kemi Badenoch speaking at the Tory conference, with a copy of a book setting out her political philosophy, The Right Way. Photograph: Jacob King/PA  Adrian Ramsay, the former co-leader of the Greens, has issued this statement about today’s vote.
I am deeply saddened the ‘Zionism is Racism’ motion has passed. It doesn’t reflect Green principles or my own view.
The Green Party has long supported the principle of self-determination, and I stand by our 2024 manifesto commitment of equal rights of Israelis and Palestinians.
Zarah Sultana, the Your Party MP, agrees with Green party activists about Zionism. She has posted this on social media.
The Board of Deputies of British Jews, the Community Security Trust and Jewish Leadership Council wrote a joint letter to the Green party before today’s vote saying that, if the ‘Zionism is racism’ motion were to pass, the party would place itself “on the extreme margins of democratic politics”.
The Lib Dem MP Tim Farron says Green party members unhappy about the ‘Zionism is racism’ vote are welcome to join his party.
That the antisemitic entryists who have captured the Green Party, are being antisemitic, is no surprise. That the Party Leader skipped this vote and failed to use his authority to argue against them, is an astonishing act of weakness. Real Greens are welcome in the Lib Dems…
Chris Philp, the shadow home secretary, has issued this statement on behalf of the Conservative party about the Greens’ ‘Zionism is racism’ vote. He said:
British Jews should not have to disclaim a belief in Jewish self-determination and the existence of Israel in order to be accepted by a British political party.
One look beneath the surface of Zack Polanski’s Green party shows a party toxic to its core. It is clear the Green party cannot bring itself to stand unambiguously against those who hate Jews.
Here is some more on the Green party vote from journalists and commentators.
From the Guardian’s Jessica Elgot
It’s hard to see how the Green party’s motion today will avoid an investigation by the EHRC, given Labour was previously found in breach.
From Adam Ramsay, the writer, journalist and Green party member
My brother just rang with a basic point: if you take the subjectivity of marginalised people seriously, then you have to accept the right of Palestinians to name the oppression they experience. Once we do that, it’s clear that Zionism is racism.
From Lee Harpin from Jewish News
Senior party sources now admitted the Greens have been a plunged into chaos. Polanski and MPs way too late and weak in trying to oppose Zionism motion. New policy puts GPEW totally out of step with policy on ME elsewhere in Europe
Here is the text of the Green party’s motion.
View image in fullscreen ‘Zionism is racism’ motion Photograph: Green party  This is from Paul Ovenden, the former director of political strategy for Keir Starmer in No 10, on the Green party’s vote.
Last week, the Green Party were offered the biggest opportunity they’ve ever had, in the shape of electoral reform. Today, they’ve made it impossible for them to be accommodated in any administration.
The Green party has sent out an updated news release saying that the statement issued by the five MPs earlier saying is there “no conflict between supporting the rights of Palestinians and the rights of Jewish people” has now also been endorsed by Zack Polanski, the Green leader, and Rachel Millward and Mothin Ali, the two co-deputy leaders.
Earlier I described the statement as the five MPs implicitly disassociating themselves from the motion. (See 3.53pm.) Given that Ali has now backed it, it would be fair to conclude any implict criticism is quite well hidden; Ali was in favour of the motion.
This is from Daniel Sugerman, deputy editor of Jewish News, on the statement issued this afternoon by the five Green party MPs.
This is like saying “we will never tolerate fire” as your house goes up in flames behind you.
Politics live with Andrew Sparrow
Conservative conference 2026
