URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ckreyjzzzywqo

Figure caption, Watch: What we know about Russian strikes on Kyiv bridges
Major bridges in Kyiv have been hit by Russian drone strikes for four consecutive days, as Moscow ramps up attacks on critical infrastructure in Ukraine's capital.
Two people were injured when the Pivnichnyi (Northern) Bridge was struck on Sunday morning for the second day in a row, while the Pivdennyi (Southern) Bridge was hit multiple times earlier in the week.
The latest attack came as German Chancellor Friedrich Merz made a surprise visit to Kyiv in a show of support against Russia's continuing full-scale invasion.
Russia's military said it would be intensifying strikes on Kyiv and other Ukrainian regions. It earlier said it had hit the two bridges used to transfer Ukrainian troops.
Image source, AFP via Getty ImagesImage caption, The strike left a gaping hole on one of a traffic lanes on the bridge
Video footage of Sunday's strike, verified by the BBC, shows cars moving on Pivnichnyi Bridge as a drone crashes into it before exploding, creating a ball of fire. A cloud of black smoke can be seen rising above the bridge.
Other videos and pictures have emerged on social media showing a gaping hole in the middle of a traffic lane on the bridge.
Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko said two people were injured in the latest Russian attack. He earlier said that the Pivnichnyi Bridge's roadway was hit.
Kyiv's eight bridges across the wide Dnipro River link the western (right) and eastern (left) parts, and many of the capital's estimated three million residents rely heavily on the metro lines and trains to travel across the city.
Some 500,000 vehicles use the bridges every day.
The two struck bridges are still standing - but the damage and restrictions to traffic and public transport have caused gridlock in parts of the capital at times.
"To get from the left bank to the right one and back - it's just hell," Kyiv resident Roman told the BBC on Sunday.
Large numbers of commuters cross the river, especially on weekdays. Repair teams are working to fix the damage and officials say they are planning temporary pontoon bridges, ferry services and even a tunnel under the river to keep Kyiv connected.
Klitschko also said a separate Russian drone strike had damaged a heating main, adding that there would be a temporary lack of hot water in the north-eastern Desnyanskyi district as a result.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenksy said on Sunday morning Russian drones had also attacked a warehouse in the north-eastern region of Sumy, killing one person.
Meanwhile, in the central city of Dnipro, six people were injured after a communications facility was struck, he said.
Ukraine's Air Force said that overnight Russia had launched 135 drones, including 52 jet-powered ones. It said that 125 projectiles had been shot down.
Image source, ReutersImage caption, Zelensky and Merz visited the main building of Ukraine's National Academy of Sciences that was badly damaged by a Russian drone strike earlier this week
As emergency services responded to the incidents, Germany's Merz met Zelenksy in Kyiv. They laid wreaths to Ukrainian soldiers who have been killed in the war.
Merz reaffirmed his country's support for Ukraine, writing on X: "Ukraine is facing decisive weeks. That is why I travelled to Kyiv today with the message: You can rely on us.
"Germany's security also depends on the outcome of this war. That is why we are helping out of our own self-interest as well."
Zelensky later said that a new aid package worth more than €1.3bn (£1.1bn; $1.5bn) had been agreed with Germany.
"These are weapons that will help [us] right now, as well as support for our energy sector ahead of winter," he said.
As Merz was visiting Ukraine's Academy of Sciences building badly damaged in a Russian drone attack earlier this week, fresh air alert sirens were heard across the city. Two people were killed in that drone attack.
Image source, ReutersImage caption, He joined Zelensky at a memorial to fallen Ukrainian soldiers
Since Merz became chancellor in May 2025, Germany has become the single largest donor to Ukraine.
He said the country "needs all our support in the coming weeks", adding: "If Russia is not stopped, its war machine will sooner or later turn against us."
Zelensky said there would be "important agreements" made between Ukraine and Germany.
The Ukrainian president has made repeated appeals for Western allies to provide more military support to the country, including supplying advanced interceptors that can shoot down new jet-powered Russian drones and also ballistic missiles.
The Russian defence ministry said on Sunday it would intensify its strikes across Ukraine in response to comments made by Zelensky earlier this week, in which he said Kyiv would ramp up its attacks on Russian oil refineries.
Russian President Vladimir Putin had earlier said his military was carrying out retaliatory attacks following Ukraine's strikes on Moscow's energy facilities, despite the fact that it was the Kremlin that had first launched such attacks.
Putin began a full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, and Moscow currently controls about 20% of Ukrainian territory.
The Russian foreign ministry on Saturday repeated a warning for foreign citizens, including diplomats, to leave Kyiv.
Responding to the warning, EU ambassador Katarína Mathernová wrote on X on Sunday: "The EU Delegation is staying. Threatening us will not stop Europe's support for Ukraine. It only reminds us why that support matters!"
German ambassador to Ukraine, Boris Ruge, reacted to Mathernova's post with: "Amen - we're staying".
Image source, ReutersImage caption, In Friday's attack, a Russian drone hit cables of Kyiv's Pivdennyi bridge
Earlier attacks on the Pivdennyi Bridge prompted Kyiv's defence council to hold a crisis meeting on Friday.
Klitschko warned that the city was now in a "very dramatic situation" as Moscow was battering its "critical infrastructure, logistics, housing" and other key facilities.
Experts say Russian drones are unlikely to bring down the bridges - but repeated attacks will force their closure and risk weakening their structure, making them unusable.
Putin shows no sign of stopping the war as Russia doubles down on Ukraine
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:31Rare tornado whips through small Australian town. 00:00:31, play videoRare tornado whips through small Australian town
0:51How can the UK face drought and floods at same time? 00:00:51, play videoHow can the UK face drought and floods at same time?
0:59'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments. 00:00:59, play video'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments
1:31'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians. 00:01:31, play video'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians
1:27How AI can boost your chances of finding a new job. 00:01:27, play videoHow AI can boost your chances of finding a new job
1:27A love story born during World War II. 00:01:27, play videoA love story born during World War II
0:45'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift. 00:00:45, play video'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift
1:08New sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking. 00:01:08, play videoNew sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking
1:19Have you heard about this 90 second rule? 00:01:19, play videoHave you heard about this 90 second rule?
1:25Men in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community. 00:01:25, play videoMen in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community
1:22Why students and riot police are clashing in Paris. 00:01:22, play videoWhy students and riot police are clashing in Paris
1:19Photos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators. 00:01:19, play videoPhotos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators
1:04Flydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot. 00:01:04, play videoFlydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot
1:15Teammates hailed after saving footballer's life. 00:01:15, play videoTeammates hailed after saving footballer's life
0:42Polanski calls for three-year cap on rents. 00:00:42, play videoPolanski calls for three-year cap on rents
1:28Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever? 00:01:28, play videoBiggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever?
1:01‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
'Money-grab' or celebration? NFL kicks off London series
The Papers: Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
When parenting advice becomes too much
The Celebrity Traitors connections that might surprise you
The Kent village that helped shape Audrey Hepburn
I was told my baby boy's skin was as fragile as glass
The hidden daytime dance revolution - and the man who captured it on camera
Why thousands of couples are choosing Scotland to say 'I do'
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
2Girl, 12, fatally shot in US during 'dispute over parking space'
3Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
4Protesters gather as migrants brought ashore on south coast
5Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
6Christa Pike's prognosis still unclear after failed execution, lawyer says
7Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
8British Museum announces changes to ease Bayeux Tapestry queues
9Yemen's government announces all-out war to reclaim land from Houthis
10Why Canada is wargaming a (long shot) US invasion
