URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/oct/04/russia-strikes-kyiv-bridge-german-chancellor-merz-visits-ukraine

Skip to main contentSkip to navigation     Soldiers inspect the damage from a Russian drone strike on the Northern Bridge in Kyiv. Photograph: Mykola Tymchenko/AFP/Getty Images View image in fullscreen Soldiers inspect the damage from a Russian drone strike on the Northern Bridge in Kyiv. Photograph: Mykola Tymchenko/AFP/Getty ImagesKyivRussia strikes Kyiv bridge as German chancellor visits Ukraine in show of support
Attack shortly after Friedrich Merz arrived on unannounced visit intended to underline Germany’s backing
Russia has struck another major bridge in Kyiv as the German chancellor, Friedrich Merz, arrived in the capital in a show of support for Ukraine.
A Russian drone hit Kyiv’s key Northern Bridge over the Dnipro River, marking the fourth consecutive day that Russia has targeted bridges used by tens of thousands of residents commuting between the city’s two banks. Video footage showed cars driving across the bridge as the drone plunged into the roadway and exploded in a burst of fire. Two people were injured in the strike, said Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko.
The attack came shortly after Merz arrived in the city on an unannounced visit intended to underline Germany’s backing of Ukraine, as the country enters one of the most precarious periods since Russia launched its full-scale invasion in 2022.
Germany has become Ukraine’s biggest provider of military aid since Merz entered office in May 2025, surpassing the US as American support has declined.
Russian drone strikes North Bridge in Kyiv, UkraineKyiv has come under near-constant attack from Russia’s new jet-powered drones in recent weeks, as an intensifying strike campaign increasingly disrupts everyday life in the capital and threatens to leave the city without power this winter.
On his visit, Merz announced that Germany would fund the joint production of drones designed to intercept Russia’s jet-powered drones, adding that “significant technical breakthroughs” in recent weeks were speeding up production.
“This will quickly and tangibly strengthen Ukraine’s air defence,” he said. “And this strengthening is urgently needed.”
The German leader got a taste of the new reality of daily life in the Ukrainian capital. Air-raid sirens sounded repeatedly during his visit, including as Volodymyr Zelenskyy showed him the badly damaged National Academy of Sciences building, where a Russian drone strike killed two people last week.
The Ukrainian president told Merz that people in Kyiv were suffering “terrible nights and days” from the relentless attacks, and called Ukraine’s Russian adversaries “absolute barbarians”.
“We can see the entire pointlessness of this war at this place,” said Merz, adding as he arrived that Ukraine “needs all our support in the coming weeks”. “If Russia is not stopped, its war machine will sooner or later turn against us,” he said.
View image in fullscreen Volodymyr Zelenskyy (left) and Friedrich Merz in Kyiv on Sunday. Photograph: dts News Agency Germany Bundesregierung/Tobias Koch/ShutterstockRussia had already damaged Kyiv’s Northern Bridge and repeatedly struck its Southern Bridge. Although the crossings remain standing, repeated attacks and the threat of further strikes have prompted the city’s authorities to restrict or suspend traffic on five of the city’s six road bridges over the Dnipro, causing temporary closures and large traffic jams.
If Moscow succeeds in seriously damaging Kyiv’s bridges, it could create a logistical nightmare for the city of 3 million people, whose crossings over the Dnipro were last destroyed on a large scale as Nazi German forces retreated in 1943. More than a third of residents live on the left bank while much of the city’s employment and infrastructure is concentrated on the right.
View image in fullscreen A Russian jet-powered drone strikes a bridge in Kyiv on 2 October. Photograph: Valentyn Ogirenko/ReutersThe attacks form part of a broader Russian campaign against civilian and industrial infrastructure inside Ukraine. In recent weeks, strikes have hit logistics hubs, railway lines, datacentres, medical storage facilities and steel plants, alongside a sustained assault on the country’s energy system that is expected to intensify over the winter.
“He [Putin] is counting on constant escalation. He wants this very much,” Zelenskyy said at a press conference alongside Merz. “This is an answer to everyone – to those who believe that all you have to do is simply ask Putin and he will end the war for real. It won’t happen, simply.”
Russia’s foreign ministry on Saturday warned foreign nationals and diplomatic staff against remaining in or travelling to Ukraine. “Responsibility for any possible adverse consequences lies entirely with those who choose to disregard this warning,” the ministry said.
A number of foreign ambassadors, including Germany’s, responded on social media that they intended to remain in Kyiv.
“The EU delegation is staying,” the European Union ambassador, Katarína Mathernová, wrote on X on Sunday. “Threatening us will not stop Europe’s support for Ukraine. It only reminds us why that support matters.”
In Moscow, some pro-war commenters noted with glee that the Russian strikes had continued despite Merz’s arrival. “Russia used to pause strikes on Kyiv during visits by European politicians. Not any more,” wrote Sergei Markov, a prominent pro-war commentator.
The trip is Merz’s second to Ukraine since becoming chancellor. He has been among Kyiv’s most outspoken supporters in Europe and a leading voice warning about Russia’s hybrid campaign against other nations.
Last month, Germany formally accused Moscow of being behind a suspected plot targeting Leipzig/Halle airport, a key logistics hub for western military aid to Ukraine. But Merz is also facing growing discontent at home over his support for Ukraine, as his approval ratings fall.
Germany’s far left and far right are sceptical of support for Ukraine and want Berlin to scale back aid. The pressure has intensified as the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) has made big electoral gains.
Alice Weidel, the AfD’s co-leader, wrote in a social media post: “Merz is travelling to Ukraine on Germany’s national holiday and promising further billions in German taxpayer money that is missing from the pension and health insurance funds, while Germany is mired in its worst energy crisis.”
‘The enemy is tearing our city apart’: terror in Kyiv as Russia ramps up attacks
Ukraine persists with Russian oil refinery strikes in defiance of Trump
Kyiv Independent editor: ‘Our readers want Russia to suffer but we can’t be propagandists’
Ukraine war briefing: Russia pounds power grid with seven killed in biggest energy attack in months
‘If people are in a bunker, business stops’: Missile alerts cost Ukraine $45m for every hour they halt businesses
‘This is terrorism’: daytime Russian strike hits science academy in Kyiv
‘Hell on earth’: last residents eat weeds to survive in Russian-occupied Oleshky
EU removes two oligarchs from Russia sanctions list as deadline looms
European spy chiefs warn Moscow is planning more decisive action against Nato
Ukraine targets Moscow with hundreds of drones on final day of Russian election
