URL: https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/

What to know about the Iran war today:
Senior Trump administration officials met at Camp David on Friday to discuss the war with Iran and escalating conflict between the Iran-backed Houthi militia and the Saudi-backed Yemeni government army.
President Trump claimed at a rally Friday night that if the U.S. were to end the war immediately, it would still take Iran years to rebuild the damage to its infrastructure. "We could leave tomorrow, and it would take them years to rebuild from what we did to them because they just wouldn't negotiate," Mr. Trump said. "They played their cards. They played their cards too tough."
Mr. Trump said European leaders agreed on Friday to release a massive amount of their diesel oil stockpiles to help alleviate high prices following an emergency meeting of the Group of Seven leaders. The news came as multiple vessels were struck transiting the Strait of Hormuz in recent days, with the latest incident reported Sunday morning.
Updated 6:06 PM / October 4, 2026
U.S. military removes bombers from U.K. air base following security incident
The U.S. Air Force has removed all of its bombers from a U.K. air base following a security incident that led to the arrest of five British men last month, a Pentagon spokesperson confirmed to CBS News on Sunday.
All U.S. bombers deployed to RAF Fairford have been returned to their home stations in the United States, the spokesperson said. The Wall Street Journal was first to report on the bombers' return.
"U.S. Air Force bombers routinely operate around the world to support global force readiness and operational requirements," the Pentagon spokesperson's statement said. "The Airmen that operate America's bomber force, including B-1s, B-2s, and B-52s, remain ready to deliver precision global strike capabilities – including through operations that launch and recover from the continental United States – anywhere, anytime."
On Sept. 27, five men, all British nationals in their 20s and from London, were arrested on suspicion of explosives and terror offenses close to the RAF Fairford air base, which has been used by American bombers to strike Iran. The suspects have since been released on bail.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-662b299f
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Energy Secretary Chris Wright says Trump was "well aware of the risks to energy flows" before launching Iran war
Energy Secretary Chris Wright said Sunday that President Trump was "well aware of the risks to energy flows" before launching the war in Iran earlier this year, but argued "the world cannot sustain a nuclear-armed Iran."
"He knew it was going to elevate energy prices in the short run, he said, 'I'm going to take a hit there, but I got to do the right thing,'" Wright said on "Face the Nation with Margaret Brennan."
Americans have been feeling the financial squeeze of soaring gas and diesel prices in recent months. But the Trump administration has pointed to the potential threat a nuclear-armed Iran could pose, and how it could represent a long-term threat to energy prices. Wright defended the president on Sunday, arguing that Mr. Trump has taken a "strong stand that Iran, the world's greatest terrorist regime, cannot and will not have nuclear weapons."
Wright expressed confidence that prices will fall, pointing to increasing supplies coming out of the Strait of Hormuz, U.S. gasoline production, the summer driving season slowing, among other factors. Asked whether he expects prices to go down over the next four weeks — as Republicans eye a tough environment in the lead up to the midterm elections — Wright said, "absolutely."
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-497eaf72
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Major global oil exporters agree to maintain steady production as ongoing war fuels rising costs
Seven major global oil exporters agreed on Sunday to maintain steady production in November, as the price of benchmark Brent crude oil soars above $100 a barrel amid the Iran war.
The group of countries included representatives from Saudi Arabia, Russia, Iraq, Kuwait, Kazakhstan, Algeria and Oman. They will meet again on Nov. 1 to review conditions in the oil market.
The Iran war, which began with U.S. and Israeli attacks on Feb. 28, has disrupted global oil supplies and driven prices higher.
The Group of Seven, consisting of the U.S., the U.K., France, Japan, Canada, Germany, and Italy, said Friday that they plan to release 100 million barrels of oil and fuel products in the coming weeks, starting with "substantial" amounts of diesel. Diesel prices recently hit record highs in the U.S., squeezing farmers, truckers and consumers who depend on the fuel.
The G7 promised a "frontloaded substantial release" of diesel within 20 days, before releasing the rest over four months.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-5ca8bb48
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
More than 70 reportedly killed in a single day in fighting between Houthis and Saudi-backed forces in Yemen
Fighting between Houthi rebels and a Saudi-led military coalition in and around Yemen's Taiz province has killed more than 70 people in a single day, sources from both sides of the conflict told the French news agency AFP on Sunday. The agency previously reported that 80 combatants had been killed on Friday.
As Houthi militants surrounded the city of Taiz on Sunday, government sources told AFP that 34 of its troops were killed, including 20 on the edge of Taiz province in neighboring Lahj, while Houthi military sources said 39 of their fighters were killed in fighting across Taiz and in border areas with Lahj.
The city of Taiz remains under the control of government forces but has long been besieged from the north, east and west by Houthi fighters and remains one of the main fronts in Yemen's long-running civil war.
"They've achieved the military objective of isolating Taiz from Aden, even if they haven't fully taken control of it," Farea Al-Muslimi, research fellow at the Chatham House think-tank, told AFP.
But Taiz residents vowed to resist any Houthi advance.
"We will defeat and crush anyone who enters the city of Taiz. We will not abandon Taiz," resident Zakaria Al-Dhubhani said.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-1c25fdc1
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Iran preparing response after U.S. rejects conditions to reopen Hormuz, Iranian officials say
After President Trump rejected Tehran's proposed conditions to reopening the Strait of Hormuz — while leaving the door open to further talks or renewed military operations — Iranian officials said the U.S. response was being reviewed, and it was preparing one of its own.
"The Americans, through intermediaries, have also conveyed their views on this proposal, and these views are currently being examined inside the country through the relevant channels and procedures," Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Kazem Gharibabadi told reporters on Sunday, according to the Iranian state news agency IRNA.
"Whenever the final position of the Islamic Republic of Iran is ready, appropriate steps will be taken accordingly," he said. "At the same time, the Islamic Republic of Iran is also preparing itself for any other possible scenario."
Meanwhile, Iranian foreign ministry spokesperson Esmaeil Baqaei characterized the latest U.S. counterproposal as being "in line with their previous proposals concerning nuclear issues."
"We have clearly indicated that we are focusing on the issue of the Strait of Hormuz," he said Sunday, adding that reopening the waterway required "an end to the disruptions to Iranian commercial maritime traffic and the lifting of sanctions."
The U.S. and Israel have said the war is necessary to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons, though the focus soon shifted to reopening the Strait of Hormuz after its closure sent shockwaves through world energy markets.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-708cf15c
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Iranian foreign minister tells U.S. "there is no military solution" to end the war
Iran's top diplomat insisted on Sunday that there would be no military solution to the war with the United States, with talks on ending the conflict apparently at an impasse.
"There is no military solution, nor any solution based on new sanctions,"  Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi said at a gathering of foreign ambassadors, adding that "only negotiations based on justice and fairness" could end the conflict.
"If our enemies again choose the path of military confrontation, our response will be stronger than before, and we will defend ourselves with even more force," Araghchi said.
In recent weeks, the U.S. has eased military operations in favor of economic pressure, but a main point of contention remains Iran's attempt to blockade the Strait of Hormuz. The waterway serves as a vital conduit for Gulf oil and gas, and now has become the site of increasingly frequent strikes on vessels traveling through the area.
Iran has sought to impose its control over the vital shipping lane since the start of the war, striking vessels that attempt to transit without its authorization.
The U.S. has imposed its own counterblockade of Iranian ports, and has also struck vessels it accuses of violating it.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-77fd20a7
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
10:51 AM / October 4, 2026
Referencing "decision" he'll make on Iran, Trump says "we'll have it the easy way, or the hard way"
Prior to traveling to Vandalia, Ohio, to host a midterm campaign rally on Saturday, President Trump referenced "a decision" he's going to make regarding Iran while speaking to reporters at the White House.
"We have a decision that I'll make about Iran," said Mr. Trump. "Iran's been decimated, so the only question is, it'll either be the easy way or the hard way, or we'll have it the easy way, or the hard way."
His comments followed reports that senior Trump administration officials met Friday at Camp David to discuss the Iran war and escalating conflict between the Houthis and Saudis. Among the officials at that meeting was Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth, who told reporters Saturday that the U.S. blockade of the Strait of Hormuz is "ironclad," but said Mr. Trump has "all the options he needs on the table" if Iran continues to "play games" with the waterway.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-a63cf63b
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
10:27 AM / October 4, 2026
With midterms approaching, high gas prices prompt states to waive taxes and other regulations
As critical November midterm elections approach, state officials across the U.S. are focusing on rising gas and diesel prices tied to the Iran war, as affordability remains a leading concern for voters.
Ohio is among about one-third of states that have instituted fuel tax relief in some form or another, with its lawmakers on Wednesday passing a 90-day state gas tax holiday that earned broad bipartisan support.
A number of other states have taken action to ease fuel costs within the last week. Some have suspended their fuel taxes, while others have temporarily reduced theirs or adopted targeted relief measures for farmers, loggers and others who use a special type of diesel fuel.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-d5d6ffc6
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
10:12 AM / October 4, 2026
Yemen announces military operation to "retake the remaining territories" from Houthis
Yemen will begin military operations to retake all territories currently held by Iran-backed Houthi fighters, the head of Yemen's presidential council, Rashad al-Alimi, announced Sunday.
"I announce today the start of military operations to retake the remaining territories of the republic and extend the authority of the state and its institutions across the entire national territory," Alimi said in a statement, marking the latest major escalation in the conflict between Yemen's internationally recognized and Saudi-backed government and the Houthis.
On Sunday, Alimi called on "the armed forces, security forces and all military formations to begin carrying out their assigned missions, in accordance with the approved plans, until the country is liberated from the grip of the Houthi terrorist militia."
The announcement followed a rapid offensive by the Houthis last month, which saw them seize large swaths of the Red Sea coastline.
Earlier Sunday, several security sources also told AFP that the group had effectively encircled Taiz after cutting the main supply route to the city, which is held by Yemen's government.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-8f303c36
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Unknown projectile strikes tanker in Strait of Hormuz, UKMTO says
An unknown projectile struck a tanker in the Strait of Hormuz, according to the United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations Center, a British maritime security agency. The projectile damaged the tanker's engine room, but its crew was safe, the agency said Sunday. It didn't specify when or exactly where the incident occurred.
No environmental impacts were reported in connection with the strike, the agency said, adding that authorities had opened an investigation into the incident. Vessels traveling through the Strait of Hormuz are advised to transit with caution.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-a551dc98
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
11:29 PM / October 3, 2026
Hegseth calls U.S. blockade of Strait of Hormuz "ironclad"
Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth said Saturday that the U.S. blockade of the Strait of Hormuz is "ironclad" and that President Trump has "all the options he needs on the table" if Iran continues to "play games" with the strait.
"Iran wants to play games with things like the Strait of Hormuz. They don't control it, we do," Hegseth told reporters. "They have literally gotten nothing through. Our blockade has been ironclad and we're running almost at prewar levels every single night through that, you see that as far as the throughput."
He added: "So we feel like we're in a very strong position. Iran ought make the right choice. If they don't, the president is going to have all the options he needs on the table. But he is not going to let these things extend unnecessarily. He understands what the mission is and we can get it done when called upon."
Hegseth also said that Mr. Trump is "hellbent" on Iran not having a nuclear weapon.
"The message is very simple: Iran will never ever ever have a nuclear weapon. President Trump is hell-bent and determined to ensure that they do not; they will not," Hegseth said.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-f4228ef6
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Updated 6:30 PM / October 3, 2026
Houthis claim strike on oil facility near Riyadh as Saudis hit Sanaa
Yemen's Houthis claimed an attack on an oil facility near the Saudi capital on Saturday, where an Agence France-Presse journalist saw flames and smoke, and accused the Gulf kingdom of striking Sanaa dozens of times.
The foes have traded strikes since the Houthis seized all of Yemen's Red Sea coast and took control of the Bab al-Mandab strait in a lightning offensive last month.
Houthi-affiliated channel Al-Masirah TV reported that "Saudi enemy aircraft" hit Sanaa with 26 strikes, after earlier reporting "Saudi aggression" against the Yemeni capital, without providing details on the targets or casualties.
Two correspondents in Sanaa reported hearing loud explosions and seeing warplanes firing missiles at the city.
In neighboring Saudi Arabia, flames and smoke were seen rising on Saturday afternoon from an Aramco facility south of Riyadh, an AFP journalist said.
While the Saudi authorities are yet to comment, late on Saturday, the Houthi military spokesman Yahya Saree said the group had targeted an oil facility near Riyadh with ballistic missiles and drones, adding that they sparked fires at the targeted sites.
The AFP journalist reported seeing firefighters attempting to extinguish a blaze at Aramco's Riyadh refinery, located south of the capital, while ambulances and police vehicles were stationed near the facility.
Sources familiar with the situation confirmed to CBS News that the attack took place, but said the Saudis are still assessing who is responsible.
The White House and U.S. Central Command did not immediately respond to requests for comment on Saturday's attack.
CBS News reported last week that the Houthis had expanded attacks into Saudi Arabia, targeting oil storage facilities at King Khalid International Airport in Riyadh and Aramco facilities in Yanbu, while Saudi officials said a ballistic missile aimed at Riyadh was intercepted.
Meanwhile, the Houthis' Al-Masirah channel earlier on Saturday also reported missile strikes on the telecommunications network in Yemen's northwestern governorate of Saada, one of the group's strongholds.
It comes after the Houthis said that Saudi Arabia bombed the Yemeni capital itself on Thursday night for the first time since renewed fighting broke out between the two sides in July.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-c9543782
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
11:34 AM / October 3, 2026
Senior Trump admin. officials met at Camp David to discuss Iran war, Houthi conflict: Sources
Senior administration officials convened at Camp David on Friday for hourslong discussions on the Iran war and the Saudi-Houthi conflict in Yemen, sources familiar confirmed to CBS News.
The attendees included Vice President JD Vance, Secretary of State Marco Rubio, Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth, Special Envoy to the Middle East Steve Witkoff, CIA Director John Ratcliffe and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Dan Caine, the sources said.
The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The news was first reported by Axios.
The Iran war has now dragged on for over seven months since it was launched in strikes by the U.S. and Israel on Feb. 28. Meanwhile, the war between the Iran-backed Houthis and the Saudi-backed Yemeni government has increased in intensity in recent months after a ceasefire that had lasted for four years.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-e324845b
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
10:07 AM / October 3, 2026
325 million barrels of oil from strategic reserves released, IEA says
Member countries have so far released 325 million barrels of oil and oil-derivative products from strategic reserves, from 400 million barrels promised in March, the International Energy Agency said Saturday.
The update came a day after G7 countries, in coordination with the IEA, agreed to immediately release 100 million barrels of diesel and crude oil to ease global energy supply concerns caused by fallout from the U.S.-Iran war.
The G7 did not say whether the 100 million barrels included the outstanding 75 million barrels from the March IEA commitment, or came on top of that.
President Trump has been pressuring allies to release diesel reserves to ease a spike in prices for the fuel, being felt in America and elsewhere.
Restricted diesel supplies are one of the consequences of the war in the Middle East, where Iran has been throttling ship traffic through the Strait of Hormuz in retaliation for U.S. and Israeli attacks.
Ukrainian strikes on Russian refineries, part of the fightback against Moscow's strikes, have also affected the market.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-50f1c746
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Flames, smoke at Aramco facility south of Saudi capital
Flames and smoke were seen rising from a facility belonging to Saudi oil giant Aramco south of the kingdom's capital Riyadh on Saturday, an AFP journalist said.
The circumstances remained unclear but in recent weeks Aramco, majority-owned by the Saudi state, has come under attack from the Iran-backed Houthi militia targeting the kingdom as part of the war in Yemen — where Riyadh is backing the internationally recognized government.
Aramco remains the flagship company of the Saudi economy and one of the largest firms in the world by market capitalization.
Last month, the Houthis said they launched strikes targeting "sensitive sites" in Riyadh and Aramco facilities in the kingdom's port city of Yanbu.
In August, they also targeted an airport and a facility belonging to Aramco in Saudi Arabia's southern Najran region.
In July, the Houthis announced a maritime blockade of Saudi Arabia, hitting Saudi tankers in the Red Sea and raising questions about Riyadh's continued ability to deliver vast quantities of crude to international markets.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-bf5226da
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Loud explosions heard in Yemen capital
Loud explosions were heard in the Yemeni capital of Sanaa on Saturday, as the Iran-backed Houthis reported airstrikes in the area by Saudi forces.
One correspondent heard at least five blasts in different areas, while another saw two warplanes firing missiles on the city.
Al-Masirah TV, a Houthi-affiliated media outlet, reported "Saudi aggression" against the capital, without providing details on the targets or casualties.
The channel had also earlier on Saturday reported missile strikes on the telecommunications network in the northwestern governorate of Saada, a Houthi stronghold.
Saudi Arabia bombed the Yemeni capital on Thursday night for the first time since renewed fighting broke out between the two sides in July, the Houthis claimed.
After several years of calm, Yemen was plunged back into civil war in July, pitting the Iran-backed Houthis, who control most of northwest Yemen, including Sanaa, against Yemen's internationally recognized government, which is backed by neighboring Saudi Arabia.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-76070fc9
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Oil tanker struck by projectile near Strait of Hormuz
An oil tanker has been struck by a projectile about 4 nautical miles east of Oman, near the Strait of Hormuz, according to a U.K. navy agency.
The tanker reported at just after 1 a.m. local time on Saturday it was struck on the port side. It said all crew members on the ship were safe, according to the U.K. Maritime Trade Operations.
The unidentified tanker was hugging the Omani coast, which is the U.S. route into and out of the Strait of Hormuz. Iran has repeatedly targeted vessels taking that route instead of the northern Iranian route.
A tanker on Friday was also targeted in the Strait of Hormuz. A small fire broke out in that strike but it was brought under control and no one was injured, according to the UKMTO.
The attack on Saturday would be the fifth such strike of the week.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-2194f050
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
U.K.-Iranian dual national released on bail following arrest over British air base incident
The sixth man arrested in connection with the incident at the U.S.-run RAF Fairford air base has been released on bail, according to a statement from U.K. Counter Terrorism Policing.
The 25-year-old, with dual U.K. and Iranian citizenship, was arrested on Thursday in connection with five other men who were found near RAF Fairford last weekend with large oil drums in their vehicle. An accelerant, gasoline, was found in the vehicle, but no explosives, authorities said.
The individual, whom authorities initially said was 27, was arrested in Westminster, London, "on suspicion of preparation of terrorist acts under Section 5 of the Terrorism Act 2006." Despite being released on bail, the suspect will be under strict observation.
Earlier this week, Prime Minister Andy Burnham said the U.K. sees "strong indications" that Iran played a part in the incident. Iran denies involvement.
"There are strong indications that Iran played a part in what happened over the weekend at RAF Fairford, but of course it remains an ongoing, complex and serious police investigation, and of course we are working closely with our colleagues in the United States of America," the prime minister told the BBC.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-9fae21f8
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
11:42 PM / October 2, 2026
Trump says Iran "played their cards too tough"
Speaking at a campaign event in Mobile, Alabama, on Friday night, President Trump reiterated his belief that the war with Iran will end soon after the midterm elections.
Mr. Trump told the crowd that when the war ends, "oil prices will come tumbling down."
He also claimed that if the U.S were to end the war immediately, it would still take Iran years to rebuild the damage to its infrastructure.
"We could leave tomorrow, and it would take them years to rebuild from what we did to them because they just wouldn't negotiate," Mr. Trump said. "They played their cards. They played their cards too tough."
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-6f6c3da9
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Iran sentences leading actress who denounced protest crackdown
A leading Iranian actress has been sentenced to one year in prison in Iran for her support of protesters killed during a bloody crackdown on anti-government rallies in January, a U.S.-based nongovernmental organization said Friday.
Elnaz Shakerdoust, who acted in dozens of films over a two-decade career, said in February she would never perform in the country again after the authorities killed thousands in a crackdown on nationwide protests.
The actress' sentence, which also includes a two-year ban on political, artistic and online activities, was upheld on appeal, according to the U.S.-based Human Rights Activists News Agency NGO and the independent outlet Emtedad, which spoke with the actress' lawyer.
Shakerdoust's current whereabouts remain unknown.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-db3a150e
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Rubio held call with Jordanian king about situation in Middle East
Secretary of State Marco Rubio held a call with Jordanian King Abdullah II on Friday to discuss the conflicts in the Middle East, according to State Department spokesperson Tommy Pigott.
The readout on the call is light on specifics, but said the two spoke about "a range of bilateral and regional issues, including implementing the Trilateral Framework in Lebanon, disarming Hizballah, and promoting stability in Syria."
"Secretary Rubio thanked King Abdullah for Jordan's steadfast role in advancing regional security," the statement added.
Jordan has long been an ally of the United States in the Middle East. Iran has repeatedly targeted Muwaffaq Salti Air Base in Jordan, which houses American troops and airplanes. In July, three U.S. soldiers were killed in a strike on the base.
In September, a strike on Muwaffaq Salti Air Base damaged several U.S. war planes.
Iran has continued to threaten strikes against any country that hosts the U.S. military in the Middle East.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-27a3fe4d
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
12:55 PM / October 2, 2026
Tanker hit by projectile in the Strait of Hormuz, U.K. navy agency says
The U.K. navy's Maritime Trade Operations center said a tanker reported being struck by an unknown projectile Friday afternoon as it transited through the Strait of Hormuz to leave the Persian Gulf.
In a statement, UKMTO, said the impact caused "a small fire and blackout onboard," but the fire was extinguished and the vessel continued on its way, with "no reported casualties or environmental impact."
At least four vessels have been hit by unknown projectiles this week in and around the strait, according to UKTMO, but analysts say the Gulf's energy producers are making more use of alternative routes as Iran continues threatening maritime traffic.
Maritime data firm Kpler said earlier this week those alternate export routes had helped restore energy exports from the Persian Gulf to near prewar levels.
The routes include shipping lanes through the Red Sea and Suez Canal, as well as a pipeline through the United Arab Emirates that effectively bypasses the strait, and a U.S.-protected route through the waterway.
About 21.8 million barrels per day of crude and fuel products made from crude are being shipped weekly, on average, compared to the prewar baseline of 23.3 million barrels per day, Kpler said.
"We are getting closer to the norm, we are not at pre-conflict levels, but we are getting close to there," said Matt Smith, Kpler's director of commodity research.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-c3ff8db5
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
12:01 PM / October 2, 2026
Trump says Europe has agreed to release "massive amount" of diesel oil from stockpiles
President Trump said European leaders have agreed to release a "massive amount" of their diesel oil stockpiles to alleviate high prices, following an emergency meeting of the Group of Seven leaders.
A G7 video conference convened Friday morning to discuss fuel supply and prices, after a call overnight between French President Emmanuel Macron and Mr. Trump. After that meeting, Mr. Trump said Europe would release diesel oil from its stockpiles, beginning "immediately."
"Europe has just agreed to release a massive amount of their heavily stocked Diesel Oil," Mr. Trump wrote on Truth Social. "The process will begin immediately. Thank you for your attention to this matter!"
A joint statement from G7 leaders released by the Élysée Palace in Paris confirmed a "coordinated release" of 100 million barrels that is to begin immediately and will take place over a four-month period. This will include a "front-loaded substantial diesel release within the first 20 days by G7 members and partners," the statement said.
The G7 consists of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the U.S., including the European Union as a non-enumerated member.
A White House official said Mr. Trump spoke with Macron last night and with the G7 leaders this morning to negotiate the release of European diesel stockpiles.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-047ff3f0
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
11:31 AM / October 2, 2026
Iranian official mocks Trump: "You can win every day in your own imagination"
Iran's Supreme National Security Council secretary, Mohsen Rezaei, mocked President Trump in a post on X on Friday, calling him "the worst president in American history."
"After one failure after another, the worst president in American history just keeps talking," Rezaei wrote, "and now his words have even outrun his own fantasies."
"You can win every day in your own imagination," he said. "But reality is shaped by Iran — by its people, its soldiers, and its missiles."
The president said Thursday he was "ensuring that Iran will be very quickly ended," insisting that Iran's ruling theocracy "is ready to fold up," and he believes the U.S. will win the seven-month war "right after the election," if not before the U.S. midterms in early November.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-e287b6ed
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
11:01 AM / October 2, 2026
Yemen violence has displaced more than 145,000 people, U.N. says
Ongoing hostilities in Yemen have now displaced over 145,000, the United Nations Population Fund said Friday, with displaced women and girls facing the gravest risks.
Around 35,000 women "of childbearing age" and more than 3,200 pregnant women are among the displaced, according to the UNFPA.
"UNFPA partners have reported several instances of pregnant women giving birth on the roadside while fleeing hostilities, without skilled assistance and amid life-threatening delays in reaching comprehensive emergency obstetric and newborn care," the agency said in a statement.
Nine health facilities in the governorates affected by the conflict in the west of Yemen have reportedly been destroyed or can no longer operate, the UNFPA said, while eight more have suspended services.
The Saudi-led coalition fighting Yemen's Iran-backed Houthis accused the rebels on Thursday of attacking an electricity distribution station in the Saudi city of Medina, home to the second-most holy site in Islam.
Intense fighting between both sides near the Red Sea saw 80 combatants killed over the past day alone, sources on both sides told the French news agency AFP on Friday.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-3792f04d
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
10:17 AM / October 2, 2026
80 combatants reportedly killed as Houthis battle for ground near Yemen's Red Sea coast
Intense fighting between Yemen's Iran-backed Houthis and Saudi-backed forces over territory near a waterway that is crucial to global energy flows saw 80 combatants killed over the past day alone, sources on both sides told the French news agency AFP on Friday.
Fighting near the Red Sea coast in Taiz province has raged since the Houthis launched a lightning offensive weeks ago against Yemen's internationally-recognized, Saudi-backed government.
The Houthis have seized control of Yemen's entire Red Sea coast, including territory along the Bab el-Mandeb Strait, the southern gateway to the sea and thus a crucial chokepoint not only for Saudi energy exports, but for global shipping as a whole.
According to Houthi military sources, at least 55 anti-government fighters have been killed over the past 24 hours in fighting against government troops in the Taiz area. Government sources, meanwhile, told AFP that 26 troops on that side had been killed.
Fighting around Taiz is raging on several fronts, including in highlands overlooking the coastal areas seized in recent weeks by the Houthis. The rebels have yet to wrest control of Taiz city, however, which is Yemen's third-largest after Sanaa and Aden.
The U.N.'s special envoy for Yemen, Hans Grunberg, said Thursday he was alarmed by developments in Taiz, adding that the Houthis' operations pose "grave risks to the civilian population."
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-6eb8efc4
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Netanyahu says if anyone "dispatched" FlyDubai copilot, they "will pay a very heavy price"
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has said Friday that authorities were investigating whether the FlyDubai co-pilot accused of trying to crash a flight to Israel with 174 people on board could have been "dispatched" by some third party.
The Israeli leader vowed that if that is found to be the case, whoever sent him would "pay a very heavy price."
The co-pilot of the flight from Dubai to Tel Aviv allegedly stabbed the aircraft's captain and tried to crash the plane before being restrained by a group of passengers.
"As time passes, the picture is becoming clearer; the attacker underwent Islamist radicalization. He came to crash the plane with its passengers," Netanyahu said Friday. "We are investigating whether he was dispatched, and whoever sent him will pay a very heavy price."
President Trump suggested on Thursday that Iran could be linked to the incident, without offering any evidence or basis for the conclusion.
Asked by reporters if he had been briefed about any possible links between Iran and the co-pilot, Mr. Trump said: "I would say the answer, based on what I'm hearing, is yes," adding: "But we're working on it right now."
When asked if the co-pilot could have been working for or with Iran's Revolutionary Guard Corps, Mr. Trump said he "could've been, yeah."
In response to a question about potential U.S. retaliation if Tehran was connected to the attack, Mr. Trump said "they'll be hit, very hard, don't worry."
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-43edaa7e
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Lebanese prime minister says country cannot rebuild from war alone
Lebanese Prime Minister Nawaf Salam said Friday that rebuilding regions destroyed in the latest Israel-Hezbollah war is beyond the state's capacity, calling for funding as he visited the heavily damaged south.
"I am aware of the magnitude of the crisis," Salam said in Nabatieh, a major southern city hit hard by Israeli airstrikes. "But the scale of the needs exceeds the capacities of the Lebanese state and its ability to bear these burdens alone."
"We still need significant funding" for reconstruction, the prime minister said.
Lebanese militant group Hezbollah drew the country into the broader Iran war in March by attacking Israel, which responded with massive airstrikes and a ground invasion. The fighting followed a previous Israel-Hezbollah conflict that erupted in 2023, which led to an all-out war the following year. Lebanese authorities have put the overall death toll from both rounds of fighting at more than 8,900.
Hundreds of thousands of people remain displaced, mainly from the south, where Israeli forces have occupied a self-declared "security zone" stretching about six miles into Lebanon from the shared border with Israel.
Last month, Salam said the estimated total cost of the two wars could exceed $27 billion.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-dc2beb19
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Iranian lawmakers advance legislation to declare full control over Strait of Hormuz
Iran's parliament has completed a committee-level consideration of a proposed bill that would establish what lawmakers frame as the future Iranian management of the Strait of Hormuz, including the imposition of fees on commercial vessels using the vital waterway.
Hassan Ghashghavi, spokesman for the parliament's National Security Commission, told the semi-official Tasnim news agency the proposed "Strategic Action Plan for Ensuring Security and Sustainable Development of the Strait of Hormuz" would preserve Iranian control over all traffic through the strait in line with Iran's national interests and security.
Under the bill, Iran would charge vessels for services including navigation, environmental protection, bunkering and fuel. Ships linked to Israel, countries deemed hostile by Iran, countries that have carried out military action against Iran, or vessels carrying military cargo would be prohibited from passing through the strait under the legislation, Ghashghavi said.
Ships from countries not considered hostile would have to obtain authorization from Iran's General Staff of the Armed Forces before transiting the waterway, he added.
The bill will now be debated and voted on by Iran's full parliament and, if approved, would then require review by Iran's powerful Guardian Council and other authorities before becoming law in the country.
The Trump administration rejects Iran's rhetoric suggesting it will control the strait going forward, as well as Tehran's current demands for all commercial vessels to seek permission for transits.
Iran has repeatedly targeted tankers and other ships it accuses of using the strait without its permission, however, seriously limiting the flow of oil and gas out of the Persian gulf since the war began.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-94c19fd3
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
U.S. sent more Patriot missiles to protect oil and gas sites in Saudi Arabia and Qatar, Axios reports
The U.S. has sent two additional Patriot missile batteries to Saudi Arabia and Qatar to help protect oil and gas facilities, Axios reported Thursday, citing two U.S. officials and another unnamed regional source.
President Trump has in recent days threatened to resume U.S. strikes on Iran, telling TIME magazine it was possible that he could give the orders after the November U.S. midterm elections, saying: "With Iran, I don't think you could ever have peace."
In August, Mr. Trump threatened possible U.S. strikes on Iranian energy and civilian infrastructure, but Saudi Arabia and Qatar urged him not to give the order, according to Axios, out of concern Iran would retaliate by hitting their oil and gas facilities.
Speaking Thursday, Mr. Trump said he was "ensuring that Iran will be very quickly ended," insisting the Islamic Republic was "ready to fold up" and that he believed the U.S. would win the war "right after the election," if not before the U.S. midterms.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-b6b26042
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Iran-Iraq flights to resume soon, says Iraqi ambassador
Flights between Iran and Iraq will resume soon, Iraqi Ambassador to Tehran Yasser Abdul Zahra Al-Hajjaj has said, as the two countries work to resolve disruptions to air travel in the wake of the U.S. imposing sanctions that bar virtually all nations and entities from collaborating with Iranian carriers.
Following a meeting with Iranian Transport Minister Farzaneh Sadegh, Al-Hajjaj said the neighboring nations were examining mechanisms and initiatives to address the issue amid what he described as U.S. pressure on air transportation.
He highlighted the large number of Muslim pilgrims, students and businesspeople who typically travel between Iran and Iraq, as well as the countries' extensive economic and social ties.
"Flights between the two countries will resume soon," Al-Hajjaj said, according to Iran's semi-official Tasnim News agency.
In August the U.S. announced a raft of new sanctions against Iran, including on the country's aviation industry, which has led to multiple countries canceling flights to and from Iran.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-29cbb9b2
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Europe discussing plan for diesel stock releases amid pressure from U.S., Reuters reports
European Union nations have discussed a proposed release of additional diesel reserves amid U.S. pressure to ease fuel prices, a source with knowledge of the discussion told the Reuters news agency on Friday.
In a Friday call, various EU governments debated a French proposal for a joint release of 50 million barrels of diesel, the source told Reuters, and for International Energy Agency member countries to release 50 million barrels of crude oil.
The countries also discussed the idea that any agreement on diesel reserve releases should include a commitment from the U.S. to not unilaterally ban diesel exports, the source said. G7 leaders may discuss the proposal further on Friday on a call, Reuters reported.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-84969b69
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Saudi coalition accuses Houthis of drone attack on holy city of Medina
The Saudi-led coalition fighting Iran-backed Houthi rebels in Yemen said Thursday that the Houthis struck an electricity distribution station in Medina, Saudi Arabia, a city that is home to the second holiest site in Islam. The alleged attack drew strong condemnation from the Muslim world.
Fighting has intensified significantly in Yemen in recent weeks, with government forces reporting multiple airstrikes on Houthi targets overnight and AFP journalists hearing explosions in the Houthi-held capital Sanaa.
The Saudi-led coalition said the Houthi drone struck Medina's Taibah electricity distribution station, which provides power to the Prophet's Mosque, Islam's second holiest site. The Houthis denied any involvement.
Saudi-led coalition spokesman Maj. Gen. Turki al-Maliki said a drone struck the Taibah electricity distribution station early Tuesday morning.
"The investigation and evidence gathered by the competent authorities have confirmed the involvement of the Terrorist Houthi Militia in planning and executing this cowardly terrorist act, based on after-action review and the wreckage of the drone used," he said in a statement.
The coalition said one transformer was taken out of service without affecting the wider electricity network.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-428f2b6d
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Trump says Iran "ready to fold up" and "will be very quickly ended"
Speaking in Denton, Texas, Thursday night at the Peterbilt Motors facility, President Trump said Iran "is ready to fold up."
He said he believed the U.S. would win the war "right after the election," referring to the U.S. midterm elections in early November.
"Maybe before the election," he added.
"I'm ensuring that Iran will be very quickly ended," the president said, promising that U.S. energy prices, which have soared due to the war, would be "rapidly, rapidly coming" down.
Mr. Trump said the U.S. was "trying to be nice" to Iran's current leader, but "we don't know who the hell to deal with, to be honest with you. Nobody wants to be president."
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-c0f36177
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
U.S. military deployment in the Middle East set to swell by some 9,000 forces
The USS Theodore Roosevelt Carrier Strike Group and the USS Makin Island Amphibious Group are headed to the Middle East, a U.S. official confirmed to CBS News on Thursday.
That could mean a total of three U.S. carrier strike groups and two amphibious ready groups being deployed to the region at the same time, at least unless and until one of the groups is rotated out of the region.
A U.S. official told the Associated Press that some 7,000 sailors and 2,000 U.S. Marines were on their way as part of the deployment. That would bring the total number of U.S. forces in the region to approximately 20,000, along with hundreds of vessels and aircraft.
The forces could arrive by the end of October, the official told the AP.
The USS George H.W. Bush and the USS George Washington are already in the area, along with the USS Boxer amphibious readiness group.
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-315f0d52
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
Trump suggests Iran may be linked to FlyDubai incident
President Trump suggested Thursday that Iran could be linked to the alleged attempted hijacking of an Israel-bound FlyDubai plane.
When asked by reporters if he had been briefed about any links between Iran and the co-pilot who allegedly attacked the flight's captain and attempted to crash the plane before being subdued by passengers, Mr. Trump said, "we're working on it right now."
"I would say the answer, based on what I'm hearing, is yes," Mr. Trump said. "But we're working on it right now."
Mr. Trump did not provide further details.
When asked if the co-pilot could have been working for or with Iran's Revolutionary Guard Corps, Mr. Trump said he "could've been, yeah."
In response to a question about potential U.S. retaliation if Tehran was connected to the attack, Mr. Trump said, "they'll be hit, very hard, don't worry."
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/trump-iran-war-us-midterm-elections-troops-deployment/#post-update-0b894f29
      
            
                   
      

              
           
          
					 
			    
          link copied
The War with Iran
                          
                More
U.K. leader says Iran believed to have "played a part" in air base incident
Trump says Iran "ready to fold up"
Iran says it expects response to ceasefire plan already rejected by Trump
Was Netanyahu's fiery U.N. speech aimed at his own political survival?
Trump expects talks with Iran to resume this week after rejecting proposal
Go deeper with The Free Press
Why Trump Tied Saudi Arabia’s Nuclear Future to Israel
Houthi Defeat Is Closer Than We Think
