URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cx8dzj9vpp01o

Image source, AFP via Getty ImagesImage caption, Soldiers ride in the back of a pick-up truck on a dirt road near Taiz, amid fighting between Yemeni government forces and Houthis
The head of Yemen's internationally recognised government has announced it will wage an all out war in an effort to take all territory held by the Houthis.
It follows an exchange of strikes between the Houthis and the Saudi-led coalition in recent days.
The Iran-backed group said it had struck sites belonging to Saudi national oil company Aramco, in response to what it described as 50 Saudi-led coalition strikes in 12 hours. Saudi Arabia has yet to comment.
The Yemeni government's fierce statement was expected after the Houthis' offensive last month, which saw them seize control of the country's coastline, including the vital shipping lane of the Bab al-Mandab Strait.
Image source, AFP via Getty ImagesImage caption, Flames burn at a facility belonging to Saudi oil giant Aramco south of Riyadh on 3 October
On Sunday, Yemeni President Rashad al-Alimi said in a televised address: "Today, I announce the start of military operations to retake the remaining territory of the republic and extend the authority of the state and its institutions across the entire national territory."
Yemen's capital, Sanaa, which has been held by the Houthis for more than a decade, has come under sustained attack as government forces try to weaken the group's military capabilities.
Attacks on the Houthis have also spread across Yemen, including to the Saada region, the group's northern heartland.
Image source, ReutersImage caption, Yemeni President Rashad al-Alimi addresses the nation in a televised address in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
But security sources say the Iran-backed Houthis have continued to make gains.
The frontline in Yemen remains focused around the key city of Taiz, which is still controlled by the internationally recognised government.
On Sunday, the Houthis cut a vital supply route linking Taiz with Aden, the interim capital of the Yemeni government, AFP news agency reports.
Citing three Yemeni military sources, AFP also reports that the Houthis now control the area and supply route, effectively encircling Taiz.
"They've achieved the military objective of isolating Taiz from Aden, even if they haven't fully taken control of it," Farea Al-Muslimi, a research fellow at the Chatham House think tank, told AFP.
Al-Alimi was unlikely to have made the fierce announcement without the green light from Saudi Arabia, which remains the key backer of his government.
Saudi Arabia has been under constant attack as the Houthis try to target the country's economic lifeblood - oil.
On Sunday, Yemen's Houthi military spokesman Yahya Saree said the group had launched a ballistic missile and drone attack on Aramco sites in the capital, Riyadh, and the oil-rich Khurais area in the kingdom's east.
"Both operations successfully achieved their objectives," the spokesman said in a statement. "The strikes were precise, causing large fires at the targeted sites."
It is not the first time the group has said it has hit Saudi oil sites. Saudi Arabia has yet to comment on Sunday's claimed attack, but has previously dismissed some claims as misleading, mocking the Houthis for "chasing imaginary victories".
But it has once again shown the price Saudi Arabia - and, as a consequence, the global economy - could pay if it launched a new all-out war against the Houthis.
In retaliation, Saudi Arabia has also been striking Houthi targets, according to the Houthi-run Al-Masirah TV channel. It said at least two people had been wounded in strikes on Sunday.
On Saturday, Yemen's government also said its forces had hit Houthi targets across the country, including in Sanaa, Saada and the group's positions near Taiz in the south-west.
Image source, ReutersImage caption, Smoke rises from the site of an air strike in Sanaa on 4 October
Yemen is one of the poorest countries in the world and remains gripped by a vast humanitarian crisis.
A war erupted in 2014, when the Houthis seized the capital city from the Saudi-backed government, before going on to take control of swathes of the country's north.
Riyadh intervened in the war the following year, leading an international coalition.
After several years of relative calm, the war reignited in July amid the widening conflict in the Middle East.
Last month, a lightning offensive enabled the Houthis to seize the country's entire Red Sea coast, stopping Saudi Arabia from using it as an alternative oil export route to the Strait of Hormuz.
The strategy benefited the Houthis' main sponsor, Iran. But it has also forced Saudi Arabia back into direct military confrontation with the Houthis.
Inside Yemen's front-line city as Houthis battle for control
Watch: BBC reports from the front-line of an escalating war in Yemen
Who are the Houthis and what do they want?
Double strike near crowded market in Yemen
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:31Rare tornado whips through small Australian town. 00:00:31, play videoRare tornado whips through small Australian town
0:51How can the UK face drought and floods at same time? 00:00:51, play videoHow can the UK face drought and floods at same time?
0:59'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments. 00:00:59, play video'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments
1:31'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians. 00:01:31, play video'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians
1:27How AI can boost your chances of finding a new job. 00:01:27, play videoHow AI can boost your chances of finding a new job
1:27A love story born during World War II. 00:01:27, play videoA love story born during World War II
0:45'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift. 00:00:45, play video'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift
1:08New sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking. 00:01:08, play videoNew sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking
1:19Have you heard about this 90 second rule? 00:01:19, play videoHave you heard about this 90 second rule?
1:25Men in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community. 00:01:25, play videoMen in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community
1:22Why students and riot police are clashing in Paris. 00:01:22, play videoWhy students and riot police are clashing in Paris
1:19Photos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators. 00:01:19, play videoPhotos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators
1:04Flydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot. 00:01:04, play videoFlydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot
1:15Teammates hailed after saving footballer's life. 00:01:15, play videoTeammates hailed after saving footballer's life
0:42Polanski calls for three-year cap on rents. 00:00:42, play videoPolanski calls for three-year cap on rents
1:28Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever? 00:01:28, play videoBiggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever?
1:01‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
'Money-grab' or celebration? NFL kicks off London series
The Papers: Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
When parenting advice becomes too much
The Celebrity Traitors connections that might surprise you
The Kent village that helped shape Audrey Hepburn
I was told my baby boy's skin was as fragile as glass
The hidden daytime dance revolution - and the man who captured it on camera
Why thousands of couples are choosing Scotland to say 'I do'
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
2Girl, 12, fatally shot in US during 'dispute over parking space'
3Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
4Protesters gather as migrants brought ashore on south coast
5Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
6Christa Pike's prognosis still unclear after failed execution, lawyer says
7Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
8British Museum announces changes to ease Bayeux Tapestry queues
9Yemen's government announces all-out war to reclaim land from Houthis
10Why Canada is wargaming a (long shot) US invasion
