URL: https://www.cnn.com/2026/10/03/europe/russia-strikes-northern-southern-bridges-kyiv-attacks-intl

Russia strikes another major bridge in Kyiv as attacks on Ukrainian capital escalate | CNN


  




  
  
  

  











 

  

  

    
    

  
  
  

  


  





  


    
    
      
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
   

  





  


  
         

         

  

  
         
        
         


    

    
    
  
     
    
      
            

        
        
        

        

      
        


  World
      
      Europe
      
      2 min read



        
  
      
      
    
      Russia strikes another major bridge in Kyiv as attacks on Ukrainian capital escalate
Technicians repair a trolleybus power line that was damaged following a Russian strike on the Northern Bridge in Kyiv on October 3, 2026.
    
  
          Sergei Supinsky/AFP/Getty Images
        
      
    
    


          
        
          

        
          
                    
        
        
            
                
                
                     

                
            
                
                    

  

    
        
                  
    Russia
    
        
        
    


                  
    War in Ukraine
    
        
        
    


        
        
          
            See all topics 

          
    


                
                
                      


    
            
                     

                    Facebook
            
            
                     

                    Tweet
            
            
                     

                    Email
            
            
                     

                    Link
            
                
                         

                        Threads
                
        
             

            Link Copied!
        
    
    
         

    
    
         

    


                
        
        
                
                         

                        Follow
                
                
                         

                
        
    

              
                                 
                
    
            A Russian strike hit Kyiv’s Northern Bridge on Saturday, marking the latest in a series of attacks on the city’s infrastructure as Moscow escalates its campaign on the Ukrainian capital.
Two people were injured in Saturday’s attack, Kyiv’s mayor Vitaliy Klitschko said, adding that the strike damaged the road and the power supply system that delivers electricity to a trolleybus, as well as suspended some traffic across the river.
It comes just a day after Kyiv’s Southern Bridge, which serves ground transportation and the city’s subway system, was hit five times in less than 24 hours.
The attacks have caused major travel disruption since Thursday. The Southern Bridge remains closed, with traffic on the Northern Bridge restricted.
Ukrainian officials said the strikes are effectively cutting the capital into two.
A Russian drone strikes Pivnichnyi bridge on October 2, 2026.
    
  
          Valentyn Ogirenko/Reuters
        
      
    
    



      
    
       
    
    
    
    
      
        
          
          
    
    A construction worker looks at vehicles stuck in a traffic jam caused by  overnight strikes on Kyiv's bridges on October 2, 2026.
    
  
          Valentyn Ogirenko/Reuters
        
      
    
    


    
            Kyiv is split in half by the Dnipro River, with the right bank home to the majority of the city’s business centers, offices and government institutions. The left bank is mostly residential and where at least 30% of the capital’s residents live. Russia’s Ministry of Defense said it carried out the strike on Saturday, claiming the bridge is used to move Ukrainian troops and military supplies. It also said that it targeted a logistics center in the Kyiv region.
Kyiv region military administration head Tymur Tkachenko said on Saturday that a warehouse and production premise had been hit, injuring four people.
Kyiv’s defense council held an emergency meeting on Friday.
Damage appears on a bridge over the Dnipro River following a Russian drone strike, amid Russia's attack on Ukraine, in Kyiv, Ukraine, in this handout released October 2, 2026.
    
  
          State Emergency Service of Ukraine in Kyiv/Handout/Reuters
        
      
    
    


    
            Russia accelerated its campaign in Kyiv in late August, taking advantage of the country’s lack of interceptors and limited other methods for defending against jet-powered drones.  “The capital is in a very dire situation. And it is no longer possible to pretend that we can live as we did in peacetime,” Klitschko said Saturday. “The enemy is laying waste to Kyiv. Infrastructure, critical infrastructure, logistics, housing, social facilities. The aggressor has also resumed its destruction of the energy sector. We are doing everything in our power to keep the city functioning under constant destructive attacks, when it is no longer a question of our usual comforts, but of safety and survival.” Klitschko called on society to “unite, as we did in February 2022.”
Ukraine’s Air Force said in a statement that Russian launched 157 attack drones and decoy drones overnight and in the early hours of Saturday. Air defenses shot down or neutralized 131 of those drones.
Scan the QR code to download the CNN app on Google Play.
Scan the QR code to download the CNN app from the Apple Store.
