URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmn06l362ypeo

Figure caption, Watch: People shouldn't be punished for working harder, Badenoch says
Kemi Badenoch has said a Conservative government would scrap the "cliff edge" that means parents in England lose out on childcare support when they earn more than £100,000 a year.
Speaking to the BBC's Laura Kuenssberg, the Conservative Party leader said: "What we want to see is that people who work harder don't get punished for doing so."
The earnings limit means only families where no parent earns more than this threshold are eligible for government-funded or tax-free childcare.
The announcement comes as Conservative members gather for the party's annual conference in Birmingham.
Badenoch, who arrived in the city on Saturday, has vowed the party was new and different from the one that lost the 2024 general election.
The Conservatives - who have been polling behind Labour and Reform UK over the past year - are expected to use the four-day event to lay out more of its policy agenda ahead of the next general election.
Ahead of the conference, the Conservatives produced a 100-page essay setting out their principles, external including a "central" belief that business, rather than governments, create growth.
It argues that governments should create the conditions for growth, particularly through the tax system.
In her interview with the BBC, Badenoch pitched herself as a "classic old-school Conservative" adding: "I believe in common sense - people working hard and being rewarded for that effort."
She insisted the Tories would keep the state pension triple lock, which Prime Minister Andy Burnham has pledged to change if Labour wins the next election.
She said the policy, under which state pensions rise each year by the highest of inflation, average wages, or 2.5%, was "the right policy for pensioners".
She added: "What we don't want to see is people going after the elderly, chasing after vulnerable and disabled people, and then the extremely large cohort of people who can work, who are not working, are left alone."
The Conservatives have long called on the government to cut the growing welfare budget including by implementing tighter restrictions on claimants.
The party said its childcare announcement would be a "first step" in broader efforts to address issues in the tax system which damage incentives to work or invest.
This will be a theme of shadow chancellor Andrew Griffith's conference speech on Monday.
Since September 2025, working parents in England have been entitled to 30 hours of free childcare, external for children aged between nine months and four years old.
However, to qualify both parents must earn less than £100,000 a year, although all three and four-year-olds are eligible for 15 hours of free childcare, regardless of parental income.
The same £100,000 eligibility threshold also applies to the government's tax-free childcare scheme, external, and has remained unchanged since it was originally set under the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government.
For every £8 paid into an online childcare account, the government adds £2, up to £2,000 per child per year, which parents can then use to pay for childcare.
The Tories said that if they return to power, they would remove the £100,000 threshold entirely for tax-free childcare and free childcare hours.
The threshold has been criticised by economists, who point out it can leave parents worse off overall even after a pay rise of tens of thousands of pounds.
In her interview with Kuenssberg, Badenoch added: "What we want to see is more people in work and not taking the wrong decisions or the wrong choices, and it doesn't matter whether they're earning £10,000 or £100,000 - what matters is that people are out there working".
Asked if this could result in someone who earns £1 million a year get free childcare under a Conservative government, the Tory leader responded: "It doesn't matter what you earn - we don't want you to be punished for working hard. What we're trying to do is grow our economy."
What does childcare cost and how do government-funded hours work in England?
Education secretary to ask competition watchdog to review hidden childcare costs
Tories aim to be election-ready ahead of party conference
The Tories argue the threshold may mean some people may delay having children until their incomes change, or decide not to start a family at all, describing scrapping it as "both pro-family and pro-growth".
By providing an increased incentive to work, the Tories said the move would also boost economic growth.
They added that it would tackle the "unfairness" that the threshold is calculated on an individual earner's income rather then for the whole household.
The party said the policy would be funded by cutting the number of public servants working in "executive non-departmental public bodies" - organisations which have a role in the processes of national government but operate at arm's length from ministers, such as Arts Council England and the Environment Agency.
It said this would save £1.6bn by 2029-30, covering the estimated £700 million cost of removing the childcare "cliff edge".
Have you been affected by the issues raised in this story? Get in touch.
Sign up for our Politics Essential newsletter to keep up with the inner workings of Westminster and beyond.
Conservative Party Conference
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:31Rare tornado whips through small Australian town. 00:00:31, play videoRare tornado whips through small Australian town
0:51How can the UK face drought and floods at same time? 00:00:51, play videoHow can the UK face drought and floods at same time?
0:59'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments. 00:00:59, play video'What rollers?' - Memorable Glastonbury fan moments
1:31'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians. 00:01:31, play video'Really tough': Badenoch on threats to politicians
1:27How AI can boost your chances of finding a new job. 00:01:27, play videoHow AI can boost your chances of finding a new job
1:27A love story born during World War II. 00:01:27, play videoA love story born during World War II
0:45'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift. 00:00:45, play video'We talk about everything' Dakota Johnson on her bff Taylor Swift
1:08New sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking. 00:01:08, play videoNew sniffer dog team to detect drugs used in spiking
1:19Have you heard about this 90 second rule? 00:01:19, play videoHave you heard about this 90 second rule?
1:25Men in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community. 00:01:25, play videoMen in court over alleged plot to target Jewish community
1:22Why students and riot police are clashing in Paris. 00:01:22, play videoWhy students and riot police are clashing in Paris
1:19Photos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators. 00:01:19, play videoPhotos reveal the lives of Auschwitz perpetrators
1:04Flydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot. 00:01:04, play videoFlydubai pilot describes cockpit attack by co-pilot
1:15Teammates hailed after saving footballer's life. 00:01:15, play videoTeammates hailed after saving footballer's life
0:42Polanski calls for three-year cap on rents. 00:00:42, play videoPolanski calls for three-year cap on rents
1:28Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever? 00:01:28, play videoBiggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever?
1:01‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
'Money-grab' or celebration? NFL kicks off London series
The Papers: Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
When parenting advice becomes too much
The Celebrity Traitors connections that might surprise you
The Kent village that helped shape Audrey Hepburn
I was told my baby boy's skin was as fragile as glass
The hidden daytime dance revolution - and the man who captured it on camera
Why thousands of couples are choosing Scotland to say 'I do'
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1US removes all bombers from RAF Fairford base
2Girl, 12, fatally shot in US during 'dispute over parking space'
3Badenoch's 'bonfire of green laws' and 'Drop in global dealmaking'
4Protesters gather as migrants brought ashore on south coast
5Brazil election goes to run-off as right-wing Flávio Bolsonaro wins first round
6Christa Pike's prognosis still unclear after failed execution, lawyer says
7Polanski banned from Israel after party's motion declaring 'Zionism is racism'
8British Museum announces changes to ease Bayeux Tapestry queues
9Yemen's government announces all-out war to reclaim land from Houthis
10Why Canada is wargaming a (long shot) US invasion
