URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/amp/news/liveblog/2026/10/4/iran-war-live-yemeni-forces-strike-sanaa-as-trump-warns-tehran-of-hard-way

Al JazeeraSee this story on our appVIEW IN APP Advertisement     Click to view more updates 1h ago (23:59 GMT)Our coverage continues
This live page is closing.
But our 24-hour coverage of the US-Israel war on Iran continues, along with developments in Gaza, the occupied West Bank, Lebanon and Yemen.
Join us here for all the latest news, analysis and reactions.
1h ago (23:45 GMT)Here’s what happened today
We will be closing this live page shortly. Before we do, here’s a recap of the day’s major developments:
Israel’s Foreign Ministry says it has banned UK Green Party leader Zack Polanski from entering the country over his party’s decision to pass a motion declaring Zionism a form of racism.
Iran’s Foreign Minister Araghchi says Washington has replied to Tehran’s proposal to end the US war on Iran and that the response is now under internal review.
Lebanon’s Prime Minister Salam says Beirut wants to open a new chapter in its relationship with Iran based on mutual respect and noninterference.
The Israeli army says it has killed three people it claimed were Hamas members.
Israel’s Defence Minister Katz has ordered the closure of occupied West Bank and Gaza crossings for two days from October 5.
Qatar and Jordan have condemned what they called ongoing Israeli violations in Syrian territory, including the ongoing construction of the Sufa 53 Line, a fortified military route and excavation project.
The Saudi-led coalition has dismissed Houthi claims of missile and drone strikes near Riyadh.
Israeli attacks killed and wounded Palestinians across Gaza, including in a drone strike on a school.
1h ago (23:30 GMT)WATCH: How Israel uses AI and facial recognition to track Palestinians in Gaza
1h ago (23:15 GMT)Photos: Far-right Jake Lang protests Palestine Festival in Illinois
2h ago (23:05 GMT)Israeli army kills man in southern Syria
The Israeli army says its forces have “neutralized” a suspect who allegedly attempted to infiltrate one of its sites in southern Syria.
The army said in a post on X that its troops “fired toward the suspect and neutralized him”, with no injuries to its forces.
Israeli forces have carried out artillery attacks amid ground incursions in southern Syria.
2h ago (23:00 GMT)Kuwait condemns Israeli violations in Syria
Kuwait’s Foreign Ministry has expressed the country’ “strong condemnation and denunciation of the ongoing violations perpetrated by the Israeli occupation in the territories of the fraternal Arab Republic of Syria”.
It added that the latest violation “was the completion of work on what is known as the Sofa 53 Line”.
2h ago (22:45 GMT)What we know about recent efforts to end US-Israel war on Iran
US and Iranian officials held indirect talks at the UN General Assembly, and Tehran announced a seven-day roadmap on September 25 to reopen the Strait of Hormuz and end the war.
The proposal came after Iran’s security chief said Tehran had conveyed seven conditions, including ending the war on all fronts, releasing its frozen funds and lifting the US naval blockade.
Trump publicly rejected the proposal on September 26, saying it was not “acceptable”.
Iran’s FM Araghchi said at the time that Tehran would wait for an official response through mediators and was “fully prepared” for the war to resume.
Ghalibaf, Iran’s top negotiator, said Washington has made “some proposals through a mediator” but said the “Strait of Hormuz will not open until our seven conditions” are met.
2h ago (22:30 GMT)Iranian prisoners in UAE released after years of detention
Earlier on Sunday, a group of Iranian prisoners, who spent years in prison in the UAE, were freed.
Iran’s semi-official Fars news agency reported that their release was made possible through diplomatic and security delegation talks. “Legal and diplomatic efforts to secure the rights of these citizens are being vigorously pursued,” it said.
2h ago (22:15 GMT)WATCH: Gaza’s young skateboarders turn war rubble into makeshift skate parks
3h ago (22:00 GMT)Israel bans UK Green Party leader after anti-Zionist motion passed
Israel’s Foreign Ministry says it has barred the UK Green Party leader, Zack Polanski, from entering the country after his party passed a motion declaring Zionism as a form of racism.
Green Party members passed the motion on Sunday with 1,022 votes in favour and 813 against, as Polanski abstained.
Israel’s Foreign Ministry said in a post on X that Foreign Minister Gideon Saar made the decision to bar Polanski due to the Greens’ adoption “of a resolution equating Zionism with racism, legitimising armed struggle against Israel, and calling for the establishment of a Palestinian state … meaning the destruction of the State of Israel”.
A Green Party spokesman earlier said the party was “anti-racist” and “has consistently opposed the illegal occupation of both Palestinian and Syrian land, called for an end to arms sales to the Israeli government and spoken out fearlessly about the devastating situation in Gaza and the West Bank”.
3h ago (21:45 GMT)What’s happening in the occupied West Bank?
The wave of Israeli settler pogroms against Palestinians across the occupied West Bank has continued. Here is the latest:
Israeli forces raided al-Mughayyir town northeast of Ramallah.
Settlers carried out bulldozing operations in the town of Umm Safa, north of Ramallah.
Amid the olive harvest season, settlers stole olives in Burin, south of Nablus, and Wadi Saif, south of Hebron.
Israeli authorities sentenced Manar Karaj, a pregnant woman, from Ramallah to six months in prison.
Settlers and Israeli forces stormed the Ibrahimi Mosque in Hebron.
Dozens of vehicles were set ablaze after settlers set fire in a car wash between the towns of Silwad and Ein Yabrud, east of Ramallah.
The Israeli army stormed the Jabal al-Taweel neighbourhood in the city of el-Bireh.
3h ago (21:30 GMT)No military solution to the US’s war, says Iran’s FM
As we reported earlier, Iran’s FM Araghchi said there would be no military solution to the US’s war.
“If our enemies again choose the path of military confrontation, our response will be stronger than before and we will defend ourselves with even more force,” he said at a gathering of foreign ambassadors.
“There is no military solution, nor any solution based on new sanctions,” he continued, adding, “only negotiations based on justice and fairness” could end the conflict.
3h ago (21:15 GMT)WATCH: War on Iran – Is escalation more likely than a deal?
Former Iranian and US diplomats agree that the war on Iran is likely to get worse in the coming weeks.
When US leaders insist that the war on Iran is about nuclear weapons and not about oil, Iran’s leaders don’t believe them, argues former Iranian diplomat Hossein Mousavian.
Mousavian and former US diplomat Alan Eyre – both of whom were involved in previous negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme – tell host Steve Clemons that the conflict is not heading to a peace deal or even a “permanent stalemate” any time soon.
Watch the discussion below:
4h ago (21:00 GMT)Lebanese PM says country wants ‘new page’ with Iran
Lebanon’s PM Salam says the country wants to open a new chapter in relations with Iran based on mutual respect and noninterference, according to posts by his office on X relaying his remarks to NBN.
Salam said he has accepted a meeting requested by Iran’s President Pezeshkian, adding that “we do not interfere in Iran’s affairs”. That was in response to a question asking him whether Lebanon had ever supported an opposition faction in Iran, taken sides in a domestic confrontation or interfered in Iranians’ political choices.
Noting the long history of ties between the two countries, Salam said Lebanon would prefer that Iran appoint a new ambassador, because that would ease the move to a new stage in relations.
He said authorities renewed the Iranian ambassador’s residence permit for three months “as a citizen” but not in his previous diplomatic capacity.
4h ago (20:45 GMT)Israel has killed more than 800 Palestinian teachers since October 2023
More than 800 Palestinian teachers have been killed and over 3,300 wounded since Israel’s war on Gaza began in October 2023, the Palestinian Ministry of Education and Higher Education says.
In a statement ahead of World Teachers’ Day, observed annually on October 5, the ministry said Palestinian educators are waging “a genuine struggle” to uphold the right to education “under the most severe conditions of aggression and systematic targeting”.
The ministry said more than 170 teachers remain detained “under harsh conditions”, adding that Israel’s continued withholding of Palestinian clearance revenues has caused severe economic hardship that has hurt teachers’ financial and psychological well-being.
The ministry praised teachers in Gaza for continuing to teach despite bombardment and displacement, saying they turned tents and displacement centres into classrooms.
4h ago (20:30 GMT)If you’re just joining us
Here are the latest developments:
Israel has killed more than 800 Palestinian teachers in Gaza since October 2023.
Lebanon’s Prime Minister Nawaf Salam says the country wants to open a new chapter in relations with Iran based on mutual respect and noninterference.
Israeli forces carry out demolitions in eastern Gaza City’s Tuffah neighbourhood.
The UK Maritime Trade Operations (UKMTO) reports explosions near a vessel off Yemen’s Red Sea coast.
Qatar and Jordan have condemned what they call ongoing Israeli violations in Syrian territory, including continued work on the Sufa 53 line.
Yemen’s Prime Minister Shaya al-Zindani has called on the international community and the UN to act urgently and strengthen the humanitarian response as displacement and needs grow.
First flight from Iran lands in Iraq’s Najaf after nine days.
Israeli air strike hits Haddatha in southern Lebanon.
The Israeli army says it has killed Saqr Nabil Musa al-Qaisi, whom it claimed was a Hamas member, in a strike in Khan Younis.
Iran’s Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi says the US has replied to its “seven-day plan” and the response is now under internal review.
Israel orders closure of all occupied West Bank and Gaza crossings from October 5 to October 7.
4h ago (20:15 GMT)BY THE NUMBERSIsraeli forces carry out demolitions in Gaza City
Israeli forces are carrying out demolition operations east of the Tuffah neighbourhood in eastern Gaza City, according to our correspondent on the ground.
5h ago (20:00 GMT)Defence expert says Yemen’s decisive battle marks departure from Stockholm agreement
Defence analyst Ibrahim Jalal, who specialises in regional security and armed groups, says the Yemeni response has just begun.
He told Al Jazeera that “now that the Yemeni government has announced its full-scale, comprehensive operations to engage and weaken … we will see a new calculus”.
“Peace and de-escalation processes have failed because there’s an obvious imbalance of power that has been hanging in the balance for about six years now at least. In order to break the stalemate, there must be a decisive battle,” he said.
“We can only look into what will happen after today’s announcement of the departure from defence into offence for the first time since 2018, since the imposition of the Stockholm agreement.
“This must be Yemen’s final battle, a battle that avoids many future endless battles.”
5h ago (19:45 GMT)Israeli army claims it killed two Hamas members in Gaza
The Israeli army says it has killed two people in Gaza it claims were members of Hamas.
5h ago (19:30 GMT)Lebanon cannot ‘sit and wait’ for US-Iran settlement
Lebanese PM Nawaf Salam says the country cannot “sit and wait” for a US-Iran settlement, adding that “if it happens, that’s good. And if it doesn’t happen, are we to remain sitting and waiting”.
According to a series of posts by his office on X relaying his remarks to Lebanese broadcaster NBN, he also said: “We are certainly affected by all regional variables”.
“The state cannot remain in a state of waiting. We must head south and to all regions and bear our responsibilities.”
Salam said “not a day passes” without reaffirming that Lebanon’s goal is the complete Israeli withdrawal from Lebanese territory. He also called for an end to Israeli attacks, a solidified ceasefire and work toward the release of prisoners.
Somalia won’t accept Israeli presence ‘under any circumstances’: President
In exclusive Al Jazeera interview, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud says Israel planning a naval base in Berbera.
‘Bordering on angry’: The state of play as US midterms enter final month
Democrats enter final stretch with surprisingly positive outlook as Republican money seeks to stem damage.
A Yemeni family spends a week on the road fleeing another Houthi offensive
Displaced Yemenis are fleeing again, as the Houthis capture the Red Sea coast.
G7 to release 100 million barrels of oil and diesel, will it curb prices?
Global energy prices have soared due to the US and Israel’s war on Iran and Russia’s war on Ukraine.
Nearly 1,500 migrants arrive in Myanmar from Malaysia despite UN warnings
Ethiopia’s forces retake Mekelle amid renewed Tigray fighting
Four African leaders issue joint declaration as Ethiopia war escalates
Fighting intensifies in Yemen as Iran says ‘no military solution’ to US war
Brazil election results updates: Lula and Bolsonaro locked in a tight race
Japan summons US envoy as marine arrested over Okinawa murder
Police investigating Flydubai co-pilot’s Australia ties
Israel face spitting allegation as Ireland boss ‘delighted’ ties after over
