URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c8zxl62yzxzxo
BBC: Tennessee prison chief resign after failed execution

Tennessee prison chief to resign after Christa Pike's failed execution

Tennessee Department of Corrections inmate photo of Christa Pike

The head of prisons in the US state of Tennessee is resigning after the failed execution of death row inmate Christa Pike on Wednesday.

Governor Bill Lee announced the change on Saturday, sharing the news in a joint statement with Tennessee Department of Correction Commissioner Frank Strada.

Strada said that his stepping down is \"in the best interests\" of the state, and called the ongoing investigation into the incident \"entirely appropriate and necessary\".

Pike, who was sentenced to death in 1996 for the murder of Colleen Slemmer, survived two injections and is now in critical condition at a Tennessee hospital as her lawyers seek to commute her sentence.

\"Commissioner Strada has served with integrity, and I appreciate his willingness to put the interests of Tennesseans first during this difficult moment,\" Lee said.

Lee has ordered an independent review into Pike's attempted execution and he halted all executions in the state for the year.

Attorneys for Pike called the resignation \"justified\" but said \"it does nothing to help Christa now\".

\"What happened to her Wednesday reflects a systemic failure that goes far beyond any one person,\" Pike's legal team wrote in a statement. \"We hope the Governor's call for a full, independent review will expose the profound problems within Tennessee's entire death penalty system.\"

Pike is being treated at a hospital in Nashville, Tennessee, where doctors are attempting to clear the drugs used during the execution from her body, according to legal filings.

She was injected with two lethal doses of pentobarbital on Wednesday but remained alive. She was then sent to hospital in an ambulance. While receiving the two doses, \"she could be heard crying, whimpering, and breathing loudly throughout the procedure\", her lawyers said.

As of Thursday night, she was unconscious, intubated and on a ventilator.

The state's Department of Correction has defended the method it used, saying \"the protocol does not allow for additional procedures beyond what was carried out\".

Authorities have not yet said whether they will try again to execute Pike. They have also not offered an explanation for what went wrong. Her lawyers filed an emergency motion on Friday to preserve \"any and all evidence\" related to her failed execution.

Pike's attorneys previously warned that her medical history and anatomy - including thrombocytosis (a blood-clotting condition) and small veins - meant there was a risk she would experience \"unnecessary\" pain and suffering during a lethal injection.

The attempted execution went ahead after multiple failed, last-minute legal challenges by Pike's lawyers.

The US Supreme Court rejected two separate efforts to stop the lethal injection.

Tennessee's governor also denied a clemency request from Pike, the only woman on the state's death row.

Pike was 18 when she and her then-boyfriend, Tadaryl Shipp, beat, tortured and killed 19-year-old Slemmer in 1995.

She was sentenced to death the following year after a media frenzy around the killing in Knoxville, Tennessee.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.