URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cwjdmk479mr1o
BBC Sun 00:49 BST: Sunday front pages - 'Another tax bombshell?' and 'Terror plot targets'

'Another tax bombshell?' and 'Terror plot targets'

A composite of the front pages of the Sunday Express and the Sunday Mirror on 4 October 2026.

The co-pilot who attempted to take control of a flight travelling to Israel had previously advocated for violence against women while studying remotely at a UK university, according to the Sunday Telegraph., During his time with Buckinghamshire New University, Hamam al-Hammami allegedly said women should be \"stomped on\" and slapped. The university had its licence to sponsor international students suspended on the day of the attack. Both the Home Office and the institution said the incidents were unrelated.

The Sunday Mirror leads on the court appearance of two Iranian men charged with plotting terror attacks on the Jewish community in Manchester. Its front page features pictures of the alleged targets, which include a synagogue and museum.

The Sunday Times says a leaked document suggests Russia has introduced strict rules on fighting-aged men, to get them to sign up for the military. A letter shared with the paper suggests men aged between 18 and 30 now must present their draft papers before they can take out a mortgage, buy and sell property, or be recorded as a business owner.

The Mail on Sunday focuses on Home Office figures showing taxpayers have funded more than 1,000 free hijabs this year for migrants arriving in the UK illegally. A Home Office spokesman told the paper it had a legal duty to provide basic clothing, including cultural and religious items.

The Sun on Sunday leads on comments by the footballer Andy Carroll, who says he was sexually assaulted by a former cast member of the BBC show, Fame Academy. The dance coach, Kevin Adams, was convicted in 2023 and jailed for 20 months. The paper's front page features images of the two men.

A report in the Sunday Telegraph says a church in Hampshire is appealing for the public's help in decoding a recently-discovered labyrinth. The single, winding path designed for walking meditation and prayer was hidden by an altar table at St Mary's Church in Itchen Stoke. A member of the Churches Conservation Trust is quoted as saying it feels like being in the Da Vinci Code.

And turkey is off the menu for Christmas lunch at the King's Highgrove Estate, according to the Sunday Express. It says the traditional bird will be replaced by chicken for the festive lunches, with all proceeds going to charity. Brussels sprouts also no longer feature, in an attempt to cut costs.

Sign up for our morning newsletter and get BBC News in your inbox.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.