URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cme3x85013llo
BBC: Medical plane six missing off Massachusetts

Rescuers suspend search for survivors after plane went missing off US coast

The search for the plane is being conducted near Nantucket, an island off the coast of the US state of Massachusetts

A man carries a surfboard on a beach

US authorities have suspended the search for six people aboard a medical transport aircraft that went missing on Saturday while it was travelling from Bermuda to Boston.

The Coast Guard said on Sunday evening it was ending the search off the coast of Nantucket, a Massachusetts island, after 66 hours of looking for the passengers.

\"We express our deepest condolences to the families and loved ones,\" the Coast Guard said on Sunday.

The Federal Aviation Administration told the BBC it had lost contact with the Gulfstream G-100 plane just after 01:00 local time (05:00 GMT). Authorities have notified the next of kin of those on the flight, four Canadian nationals and two Bermudian nationals.

Authorities had said earlier that they had located a \"debris field\" confirmed to be from the aircraft on Saturday evening.

The plane departed from Bermuda's L.F. Wade International Airport at 23:40 local time, according to flight data from FlightAware, and was due to land at Boston's Logan International at 01:30 EDT (05:30 GMT).

According to the tail number released by the Coast Guard, the plane belonged to Latitude Air Ambulances, a company that provides international medical flights for patients returning home.

Among those on board were two pilots and two medical staff, both Canadian, Clarence Togeretz, director of flight operations at Latitude, told CBC News.

The crew flew to Bermuda to collect a patient and their relative, who are not Canadian, Togeretz said.

FlightAware's tracker shows the aircraft significantly dropped in altitude before its communications went dark, plummeting from around 7,300m (24,000ft) to 3,300m (11,000ft).

Radio transmissions shows trouble with communications between the air traffic controller and the pilot, the Boston Globe reported based on transmissions provided by LiveATC.net.

\"You're coming in blind? Is that what you said?,\" the air traffic controller asked. \"Are you declaring an emergency, or no?\"

The pilot's response was inaudible.

\"You're coming in a little weak so I didn't hear what your response was, if you were declaring an emergency or not,\" the air traffic controller said, according to the Globe.

The air traffic controller later confirmed the pilot had declared an emergency.

An area fire dispatcher asked emergency crews just after 01:00 EDT to prepare to meet a plane with an \"electrical issue\".

The dispatcher later said \"the aircraft has lost radio and radar\".

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.