URL: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/chris-bryant-chris-orange-order-secretary-of-state-police-b3060900.html
Independent Sat 19:20 BST (PA): O'Neill criticises Bryant over Drumcree stand-off

Please refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged inPlease refresh your browser to be logged in

BookmarkBookmark popoverRemoved from bookmarks

Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Membership today.

I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our Privacy notice

It is “nonsense” for the Northern Ireland Secretary to compare the Drumcree stand-off as being between a “rock and a hard place”, Northern Ireland’s First Minister has said.

Michelle O’Neill, the deputy leader of Sinn Féin, was speaking as thousands of people gathered for a rally in support of Garvaghy Road residents who are opposed to an Orange Order march through their community.

Police had launched a major security operation in Portadown amid the gathering on the road as well as a separate rally in support of the Orangemen which was also organised in the loyalist Edgarstown Estate – with Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Chris Bryant saying he would “especially urge calm this weekend”.

Under the name of the Let Them Home Festival, a large crowd also gathered for music, food and games in support of the Orangemen.

The impasse has been ongoing since the Parades Commission gave the green light for the first time in almost 30 years for the Portadown District of the unionist Orange Order – backed by the DUP and TUV – to complete its traditional route along the Garvaghy Road.

However, a coalition of residents in the largely nationalist area – backed by Sinn Féin, the SDLP and People Before Profit – is opposed to the march going ahead and took legal action which failed before starting a sustained days-long protest to prevent the parade from taking place.

Earlier in the week, Sir Chris described the impasse as being between a “rock and a hard place” as talks ended without agreement.

Referencing the remarks, Ms O’Neill told the Garvaghy Road rally: “I never heard such nonsense.

“This is the difference between right and wrong.”

She added: “Let me be very clear, if the British Government is not prepared to end this crisis, then it’s up to every single one of us – the people that are gathered here today and all those that support this community, all those people from across Ireland and internationally who have raised their voice – it’s up to all of us to collectively and unequivocally stand with the Garvaghy Road residents and to say no to a sectarian, unwanted march.”

Deputy First Minister and DUP MLA Emma Little-Pengelly later described the rally as “electioneering” as she criticised Ms O’Neill and Sinn Féin for a “complete abdication of leadership”.

A fresh legal appeal by the residents is set to be heard in the Court of Appeal on Monday.

On Thursday night, loyalist activist and legal adviser to the Orangemen Jamie Bryson said they will accept the determination of the legal appeal on Monday as he challenged residents of Garvaghy Road to commit to walking away if their bid fails.

Asked if Sinn Féin believed there was any point in the talks process resuming, party leader Mary Lou McDonald told reporters: “The Secretary of State – from the word go – could have stopped this level of disruption and trauma and uncertainty which should never, ever have been visited on this community.”

She added: “But then the Secretary of State let everything drop and walked away – so there has to be a level of seriousness here from the British Government in its totality.”

In his speech, Breandán Mac Cionnaith, of the Garvaghy Road Residents’ Coalition, said there was “no logical reason” why the Orange march should proceed “through the heart of this community”, contending an alternative route “back the way they came” was available.

“Garvaghy Road was solved in 1998, it does not need to be solved again.”

Mr Mac Cionnaith said: “Westminster thinks we must make concessions – we have nothing left to concede.”

He added: “Only one decision that’ll be acceptable: There should be no Orange march – none at all.”

The event was also attended by former Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams and politicians from other parties, including People Before Profit’s Gerry Carroll, Social Democrats senator Patricia Stephenson, Labour senator Nessa Cosgrave, Aontu leader Peadar Tóibín and former SDLP MLA Dolores Kelly.

There were boos and chants of “shame” at the mention of Taoiseach Micheál Martin by Mr Tóibín, who accused the leader of the Irish Government of “standing idly by”.

He said: “They (the Irish Government) have a moral responsibility to be here with you to defend your rights and to make sure that this march never comes on this road again.”

The crowd also gave large applause for former UUP politician and current SDLP candidate Linzi McLaren, who said she was one of almost 1,300 signatories from the Protestant community to a letter to the Secretary of State expressing concern over the proposed march.

Sir Chris, who chaired talks with both sides during the week which were unsuccessful at reaching an agreement, said a prolonged stand-off in Portadown is “ultimately in nobody’s interests”.

He also appealed for the public to “ignore calls for more people to come to the area at this time of tension”, adding: “Such calls are unhelpful and are likely to put further strain on police resources which are already stretched.”

Elsewhere at the Edgarstown Estate gathering, Portadown District master Nigel Dawson told the Press Association: “We’re still waiting for the Chief Constable to do his job and put the parade down the road as per our legal determination and backed up by a High Court judge.”

Jamie Bryson, a loyalist activist and legal adviser to Portadown District Orangemen, was among speakers who criticised Chief Constable Jon Boutcher’s handling of the dispute.

He said: “If you can’t police Northern Ireland, wave the white flag and say it – stop dancing around it.

“If you wave the white flag, that’s not our problem.

“We won, we have the legal entitlement (to march down Garvaghy Road).”

Mr Bryson and TUV leader Jim Allister argued that either the parade should be allowed to go ahead or the Northern Ireland Executive should be collapsed.

Mr Allister said there was a “fundamental challenge to political unionism” and particularly the DUP, stating: “It is either the Portadown Orangemen come home or the Executive is gone.”

The TUV leader also accused the Chief Constable of a “gross abdication of duty” over not allowing the parade to go ahead thus far, adding that Sir Chris is “dithering and doesn’t want to do his job”.

Both Mr Allister and Mr Bryson praised DUP Upper Bann MP Carla Lockhart, who told the crowd the police were “not doing their job”.

Ms Lockhart, whose party is in powersharing with Sinn Féin in the Executive, added: “We stand in Northern Ireland at a crossroads for the PSNI (Police Service of Northern Ireland) and the British Government.

“They either accept mob rule or the rule of law – and I can tell you now if mob rule wins there’s no going back for the Chief Constable.”

Mr Dawson also criticised the police road management around the Garvaghy Road demonstration.

Ulster Unionist Party leader Jon Burrows described that gathering as a “carnival of law-breaking and triumphalism” as well as a “serious failure of political leadership” by Sinn Féin.

He said: “This is reckless, provocative and deeply irresponsible.

“It inflames tensions, is a deliberate provocation to other communities, and treats the rule of law with contempt.

“It has all the hallmarks of electioneering, with everyone else left to bear the consequences.”