URL: https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-us-strait-of-hormuz-oil-gas-price-strikes/
CBS live: US forces hit IRGC-linked tankers, oil near $100

Updated on:  September 8, 2026 / 11:12 PM EDT
            / CBS News

Follow updates on the war in the Middle East for Wednesday, Sept. 9, here. See earlier developments below.

Iran has launched missiles toward U.S. targets in Jordan, Iranian state-run media said, following the latest American strikes.

It's the latest tit-for-tat retaliation after the U.S. military said it destroyed five Iranian crude oil tankers following two attacks on a U.S. warship by Iran's Revolutionary Guard over the past two days.

U.S. Central Command, when asked about the strikes on the Jordanian air base, said it had no information to offer.

Jordan's military said its air defense systems intercepted 18 ballistic missiles launched toward its territory and two others fell in places where people do not live. It says it had no reports of casualties.

Jordan is a staunch U.S. ally that hosts American forces, making the kingdom's military bases a target of repeated Iranian strikes.

Iran's Revolutionary Guard Navy also warned crews of oil tankers near ports in Kuwait and Bahrain to immediately leave their vessels, saying the ships could be targeted in retaliation for the U.S. attacks on Iranian tankers.

The U.S. military's Central Command confirmed Tuesday it "destroyed" five oil tankers associated with Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.

In a statement accompanied by video footage of the operation, CENTCOM said the strikes were in response to a set of unsuccessful Iranian missile attacks against a U.S. warship in recent days.

Four of the tankers were struck in the Gulf of Oman, according to CENTCOM, and a fifth was hit near Kharg Island, an island in the Persian Gulf that serves as Iran's primary terminal for crude oil exports. It alleged the ships were part of Iran's shadow fleet, a network of tankers used by Iran to export oil and generate revenue for the regime.

"American forces directed the crews to abandon ship before the vessels were struck and rendered inoperable," CENTCOM said.

CBS News had reported on a U.S. attack against Iranian tankers earlier Tuesday.

CENTCOM also struck three Iranian oil tankers last weekend in retaliation for an earlier attempted Iranian attack against U.S. Navy ships.

CENTCOM forces destroyed five Iranian crude oil carriers, Sept. 8, after the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) targeted a U.S. Navy warship with ballistic missiles twice over the past two days. The U.S. warship successfully evaded the attempted Iranian attacks and… pic.twitter.com/Gi8a2tloN1

The U.S. military on Tuesday reported 26 additional service members were wounded in action in recent months.

The locations and dates of the injuries were not reported, but they were categorized in the military's casualty database under "Overseas Operations," a term the Pentagon has used for injuries and deaths in the Middle East and the Iran war since July 7.

According to the Pentagon's database, 403 people were wounded in overseas operations between July 7 and Sept. 8. In a separate listing in the database under Operation Epic Fury, the military's previous term for the war with Iran, the Pentagon said 417 people were wounded from February to July.

Operation Epic Fury's exact end date had been unclear for months, until the Pentagon told CBS News last week that it formally ended on May 5. However, the military still lists five injuries in June and one non-hostile death in July under Epic Fury.

Iran's armed forces are vowing to target U.S. bases in the Middle East in response to strikes against Iranian-linked oil tankers, Iran's semiofficial Tasnim and Mehr news agencies said.

Iran has frequently targeted U.S.-allied countries in response to American strikes on Iran.

American forces have struck multiple tankers tied to Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps in response to more attempted missile attacks on a U.S. Navy warship, multiple U.S. officials told CBS News on Tuesday.

The officials did not disclose the name of the warship.

Fox News was first to report on the strikes.

Iran's foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, derided new sanctions on Tuesday, hours after the U.S. instituted punishments for airlines not affected by previous sanctions.

"After 47 years of sanctions, the US went to war with Iran on behalf of Israel. The fallout has been disastrous for America, including its standing worldwide," he wrote on X.

"After failing to achieve its aims through sanctions or war, Washington's 'novel' solution is…more sanctions. Seriously?"

Araghchi has been a major player in negotiations over a ceasefire and lasting peace, but he's also regularly antagonized the Trump administration.

"Let this be a warning to anyone doing business with Iran's remaining airlines, all of which we sanctioned today: You are at risk of being cut off from the global financial system," Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent said in a news release.

The Trump administration accused the 36 entities targeted this week of supporting Iran's efforts to use its aviation sector to move weapons, personnel and illicit cargo.

Iran's hand is behind the Houthi attacks on Saudi Arabia, U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio said Tuesday during his trip to South America.

"The Houthis in many ways are agents and proxies of the Iranians. I think behind some of this is clearly the Iranian hand," Rubio said. "The U.S. has a very strong military relationship with Saudi Arabia, and we're watching those events very closely."

The Houthis, who are supported by Iran, launched attacks Tuesday on Abha International Airport, King Khalid air base and facilities belonging to state-owned oil giant Aramco in Abha and Jizan. At least 73 people were injured in the strikes, a Saudi-led coalition said.

The Saudis retaliated hours later with strikes of their own against Houthi territory in western Yemen. Rubio was asked whether the U.S. would put pressure on the Houthis or whether it would "stay out of this fight." He deferred to the Saudi-led coalition of Arab countries, 14 of which have signed on to support the fight against the Houthis.

"It's been going on for some time," Rubio said. "I think there's some ground operations as well where many forces are taking on the Houthis, pushing back against some of the ground advances that they attempted to make."

He also said he didn't believe the U.S. Department of War would "make any announcements on that today," as far as the U.S. getting further involved.

U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres condemned Houthi rebel attacks against Saudi Arabia on Tuesday that targeted oil facilities and wounded dozens of people.

"We condemn the Houthi cross-border attacks against multiple sites in southern Saudi Arabia," said Guterres' spokesman Stephane Dujarric.

"These attacks affected civilians and energy infrastructure, and we of course express deep concern over the reports of civilian casualties," Dujarric said.

The Saudis have since responded to attacks by the Iran-backed Houthis in strikes of their own.

The European Union also urged the Houthi rebels to "end all attacks" on Tuesday, condemning strikes on Saudi Arabia that targeted oil facilities and wounded dozens of people.

"These attacks constitute a dangerous escalation, violate international law, undermine regional security and stability and risk further jeopardising efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict in Yemen," said Anouar El Anouni, a spokesman for the bloc's diplomatic service.

The International Committee of the Red Cross warned Tuesday that hostilities affecting Yemen and Saudi Arabia risked expanding the Middle East conflict, calling for urgent de-escalation.

Yemen's Houthis said Saudi Arabia hit back with a series of strikes on Tuesday after the Iran-backed rebels targeted oil facilities and other sites, wounding dozens, in their heaviest attack in years.

The rapid round of strikes and counterstrikes follows the unravelling of a four-year truce in July, months into the war between the United States and Iran.