URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmx23xvgz1y0o
BBC Sun 07:49: debris likely caused Spitfire crash

Debris in engine very likely caused Spitfire crash

Sqn Ldr Mark Long was killed when the Spitfire he was flying crashed in May 2024

Sqd Ldr Mark Long stood net to a Spitfire.

Debris which had been present in the carburettor of a Spitfire for decades was \"very likely\" the cause of a crash in which a pilot died, according to a report.

Sqn Ldr Mark Long was killed when the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight (BBMF) plane he was flying crashed in a field in Lincolnshire on 25 May 2024.

A report published by the Ministry of Defence says the debris was responsible for causing fuel starvation, \"leading to a loss of thrust required to maintain powered flight\".

Just 56 seconds after taking off from RAF Coningsby, witnesses saw the plane turn and plunge to the ground.

Long, who was born in Bury St Edmunds, was flying a Spitfire Mk IX, built in 1944, operated by the RAF's BBMF for commemorative flypasts and displays.

The opening of an inquest heard the provisional cause of his death was head and neck injuries.

The Service Inquiry report said chemical analysis revealed evidence that indicated the debris in the carburettor \"had been present for decades\".

It said: \"The presence of multiple, contradictory publications created ambiguity over the correct procedures for carburettor maintenance.

\"The panel assessed that this inconsistency likely led to varying interpretations of how extensively the carburettor should have been dismantled, inspected and cleaned, which was very likely to have reduced the reliability of detecting any debris build-up.\"

The design of the cockpit and restraint were identified as aggravating factors, but the report acknowledged any structural design change would likely require \"significant moderations\".

\"This would not only affect the historic authenticity of the aircraft but would possibly affect overall airworthiness due to a change in aircraft mass and balance,\" the report said.

Twenty-six safety recommendations were included in the report, including improved maintenance records, reviews of cockpit protection and better training for emergencies.

The report described the recommendations as \"robust\" and said they \"should minimise the likelihood of a recurrence or similar tragedy\".

Follow BBC Lincolnshire on Facebook, X (formerly Twitter), and Instagram. Send your story ideas to eastyorkslincs.news@bbc.co.uk

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.