URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c3zxjl2pp49zo
BBC 18:06: man 40 shot dead at memorial west London

Man shot dead as families gather for memorial

The scene of the shooting on Saturday night as police continued their investigation

A police tape cordon cuts off a road outside of a community centre

A murder investigation has been launched after a 40-year-old man was shot dead in a \"senseless act of violence\" as up to 50 people – including children – gathered for a memorial service in west London.

The Met Police said it was called to the scene at 19:47 GMT on Friday after multiple shots had been heard by members of the public at the junction of Braybrook Street and Erconwald Street in East Acton.

Officers attended alongside the London Ambulance Service but the man was pronounced dead at the scene, despite the efforts of medics.

No arrests have been made and a police cordon remains in place in Braybrook Street. Police are appealing for witnesses to come forward.

The victim's family have been informed and are being supported by specialist officers.

A post-mortem examination is scheduled to establish the cause of death, but the victim is believed to have sustained a gunshot wound, the force said.

Det Ch Insp Brian Howie, who is leading the investigation, said: \"Our thoughts are with the family and friends of a man whose life was taken in a senseless act of violence.

\"We understand a large number of people had gathered for a memorial service and what should have been a time to come together in remembrance has instead left a family devastated.

\"We believe between 40 and 50 people, including children, were present when this incident occurred. Someone knows what happened and we need them to come forward.\"

He has asked anyone who was around Erconwald Street, Braybrook Street, the surrounding roads or Wormwood Scrubs playground between 18:00 and 20:00, to \"please think carefully about what you saw\".

He added: \"Did you see anyone carrying or concealing weapons, people on bicycles acting suspiciously, or vehicles being driven at speed?

\"We also want to hear from anyone with photographs, video, dashcam, doorbell or mobile phone footage or who has seen anything relevant on social media.

\"However insignificant it may seem, the smallest piece of information could prove crucial in helping us establish what happened and identify those responsible.\"

Listen to the best of BBC Radio London on Sounds and follow BBC London on Facebook, X, and Instagram. Send your story ideas to hello.bbclondon@bbc.co.uk

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.