URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2026/oct/03/iranian-men-manchester-synagogue-alleged-bomb-plot-court-hears
Guardian: Iranian men, Manchester synagogue alleged bomb plot, court hears

Rahman Salehi, 34, and Salam Ahmadyan, 36, were charged with preparing attacks on city’s Jewish community, including Heaton Park synagogue

Prefer the Guardian on GoogleTwo Iranian men identified a Manchester synagogue previously subjected to a fatal terrorist attack as a target for an alleged homemade bomb plot, a court has heard.

Rahman Salehi, 34, from Salford, and Salam Ahmadyan, 36, from Liverpool were charged with preparing to commit an act of terrorism or assisting another to commit an act of terrorism on Friday.

The two men appeared in Westminster magistrates court on Saturday morning. They wore grey overalls in the dock while and, through a Kurdish interpreter, spoke to confirm their names, dates of birth and addresses.

The pair were alleged to have carried out “hostile reconnaissance” within Manchester’s Jewish community and identified a number of potential targets including the city’s Jewish museum and Heaton Park synagogue.

The court heard the pair came to the UK illegally via small boats. Salehi arrived in 2020 before being granted leave to remain in 2023. Ahmadyan came in 2023 and has an outstanding asylum claim.

They were in contact with a third party, believed to be operating from within Iran, who “directed and coordinated” the planned attack and sent them “instructions on how to prepare an explosive device”.

Prosecutor Mark Luckett told the court: “Both defendants are accused of preparing acts of terrorism targeting the Jewish community in Manchester through the use of a homemade explosive device.

“The defendants were observed carrying out, what the prosecution say, is a hostile reconnaissance within Manchester’s Jewish community, identifying attempted targets such as the Jewish Museum and Heaton Park synagogue.”

“They were in contact with a third party who is alleged to have directed and coordinated the planned attack and provided instructions on how to assemble a homemade explosive device,” he said.

“It is assessed this individual is also an Iranian national and most likely operating from within Iran.”

The two men were arrested on 20 September 2026 in broad daylight, just before the festival of Yom Kippur, widely regarded as the holiest day in the Jewish calendar.

Before coming to the UK, Salehi lived in Germany for five years. The men are accused of acquiring a document entitled Steps for Making [a] Powder Chlorine and Car Brake Oil/Fluid Bomb and video material on how to manufacture or assemble an improvised explosive device. They are also accused of acquiring liquids, components and equipment required in order to manufacture or assemble an improvised explosive device.

They are also accused of using the internet to identify and research potential targets, acquiring images, plans and maps of potential targets and conducting reconnaissance of potential locations for attack.

District judge Nina Tempia remanded the two men into custody to appear at the Old Bailey on 23 October