URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/crvg9dk2v9xvo
BBC 17:11 BST: Reform UK cabinet councillor steps aside amid police inquiry

Cabinet councillor steps aside amid police inquiry

Councillor James Sawkins represents Waltham for Reform UK

Sawkins wears a navy blue suit and light blue tie and is looking directly into the camera.  He has a beard and wears glasses.  Wooden panelling is behind him.

A Reform UK councillor has stepped away from his cabinet role, according to a council leader, after concerns were raised over his alleged arrest.

The leader of North East Lincolnshire Council, Oliver Freeston, said Councillor James Sawkins would \"step away\" as he \"continues to grieve the loss of his father\".

On Friday, local Labour MP Melanie Onn wrote to the chairman of Reform UK over Sawkins' involvement in an \"ongoing police investigation\".

On Saturday, Freeston said: \"I understand that Councillor Sawkins has not been charged with an offence, and that the allegations concern a third party. Councillor Sawkins therefore remains a Reform UK councillor but is stepping away from Cabinet.\"

In a social media post, Freeston added: \"I have agreed with Councillor Sawkins that, as he continues to grieve the loss of his father, who sadly passed away last month and is yet to be buried, he will step away from his cabinet responsibilities.

\"Given the incredibly sensitive personal circumstances he is dealing with, I believe this is the right and responsible approach, and in the best interests of the borough.\"

Sawkins represents Waltham for Reform UK and was the council's portfolio holder for safer and stronger communities.

In September, Humberside Police said a man and a woman were arrested after police investigated reports of the sale of unlicensed medicines.

Officers said they carried out warrants at properties in Grimsby and Waltham on 11 September, where they seized suspected unlicensed prescription drugs and class A drugs.

The force said a 43-year-old man and a 43-year-old woman were arrested for a number of offences, including concealing criminal property, supplying unauthorised medical products and possession of Class A drugs.

In a letter to the party's chair Lee Anderson, Onn, the MP for Great Grimsby and Cleethorpes, asked if Reform UK were aware of the arrest and whether the party had \"considered appropriate interim measures in relation to his party and council responsibilities.\"

Sawkins has not responded to the BBC's requests for comment. On Saturday, Freeston said he had nothing further to add.

Listen to highlights from Lincolnshire on BBC Sounds, watch the latest episode of Look North.

Download the BBC News app from the App Store for iPhone and iPad or Google Play for Android devices

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.