URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c3rrylpqr4e1o
BBC 18:09 BST 3 Oct: anti-migrant protesters gather at Dover amid face mask ban

Anti-migrant protest at Dover amid face mask ban

Kent Police believed about 100 anti-migrant protesters turned up in Dover on Saturday

A group of protesters carrying a flag which reads English Defence League, marching along a road. They are marshalled by police officers in hi-vis jackets.

Anti-immigration protesters have gathered in Dover amid police restrictions and warnings against the use of face coverings.

Earlier, police vehicles lined the streets outside Dover Priory Station, which was the starting point of the march.

Kent Police said these \"robust\" preparations were aimed at keeping disruption to a minimum, after a protest last month caused significant delays at the port.

A spokesperson for the force said no arrests had been made on Saturday, and estimated that about 100 anti-migrant protesters had turned out.

A counter-protest was also held at Pencester Gardens, attended by fewer than 100 people according to the force.

Police had announced a face covering ban would be in force on Saturday from 08:00 to 21:00 BST and would apply to those taking part in the protest.

The area of the ban covers parts of Dover, including Buckland, Whitfield, Guston, St Margaret's-at-Cliffe and surrounding areas.

People covering their faces for religious, health or work-related reasons are not affected.

Kent Police wrote on social media: \"We understand the impact of protests on the residents and businesses of Dover and will not stand for any disorder that may occur.\"

The force added that a \"substantial\" number of highly-trained officers were stationed in the town centre.

Counter-protesters also turned out in Dover

Demonstrations are common in Dover, where migrants picked up from small boats in the English Channel are brought ashore.

Anti-migrant protesters from South Coast Patriots and anti-racism demonstrators from Southampton Stand Up To Racism also gathered in Southampton city centre on Saturday.

Kent Police said no arrests had been made so far

In September, a group of masked men caused major disruption near the Port of Dover, and were heard chanting \"stop the boats\".

The demonstration caused significant delays to the port's operations, as well as ferry passengers.

Demonstrations in Dover are common, where migrants from small boats are brought ashore

Kent Police were criticised for their \"slow response\", with the force adding that it was a \"spontaneous protest\".

The force told the BBC lessons had been learnt from last month's demonstrations, and it had improved its responses to such incidents.

Follow BBC Kent on Facebook,  X, and on Instagram and listen to BBC Radio Kent on Sounds. Send your story ideas to southeasttoday@bbc.co.uk or WhatsApp us on 08081 002250.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.