URL: https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2026/oct/03/green-party-conference-zack-polanski-uk-politics-latest-news-updates-labour-conservatives-reform
Guardian politics live blog, Sat 3 Oct 2026 - first published 09.46 BST, last entry 14.16 BST (page datePublished 2026-10-03T13:16:31Z, dateModified 2026-10-03T13:20:52Z). Headline: "Greens would nationalise Thames and SE Water without paying compensation, says deputy leader - as it happened"

===== 09.46 BST | Opening  summary
Good morning and welcome to the UK politics live blog where cost-of-living issues are top of mind as diesel surges past £2 a litre for the first time.
That’s a 40% increase since the start of the year, meaning the cost of filling up an average family car is now £110, nearly £32 more than before the US and Israel launched strikes on Iran in late February.

 The eight-months long war now has choked off key global shipping routes, blocking supplies from Gulf oil producers. On Friday, G7 countries including the UK bowed to pressure from US President Donald Trump and released 100 million barrels of oil and diesel.
But there are still spiralling ramifications on the cost of energy, food, transport and housing.

 Greens leader Zack Polanski yesterday used his party conference speech yesterday to call for an emergency brake on rent rises. Party deputy leaders today will announce a policy to provide guaranteed jobs for 18-24 year olds.
Tory leader Kemi Badenoch, ahead of the Conservatives party conference kicking off tomorrow, will also anounce later today a childcare benefit for those on over £100,000.
Meanwhile early word of the flavour of Chancellor John Healey’s first Budget, to be delivered in a few weeks time, suggests it will be a careful one aimed giving reassurance households and businesses, with targeted assistance, as opposed to any major tax or spending hikes.
Stick with us and we’ll bring you the latest updates from the ongoing Green party conference, as well as wider political developments.

===== 09.56 BST | Farage has 'not been believed' on safety fears, says Tice
Meanwhile, Reform leaders this morning have been speaking about the fact that the man acccused of murdering former party spokeswoman Ann Widdecombe has also been charged with a terror plot against Nigel Farage.

 Deputy leader Richard Tice told the BBC Radio 4’s Today programme his party leader has “not been listened to” over his safety concerns.

 Tice said: “(Farage’s) security and the risks to it, he’s talked about over over many times, many occasions, over many years.

 “And I think what’s particularly upsetting for those of us in and around him is sometimes he’s not being believed, not being listened to, and you know we have just got in a sense, deep regret over everything that’s happened over a long period of time.”

 Police charged Joshua Kerry, 28, with the terror plot on Friday. He already stands accused of the brutal murder of Widdecombe, 78, a former Reform representative and Tory minister, who died on 8 July at her home in Devon.

===== 10.04 BST | Anti-migrant demonstrations planned in Southampton and Dover
We can also expect anti-migrant demonstrations to be taking place on the south coast this afternoon with police on alert in Southampton and Dover.

 A group called South Coast Patriots has organised the protests, and are expected to be met by counter-protesters from the local Southampton Stand Up To Racism group.

 Police have issued a ban on face coverings in the area.

===== 10.06 BST | Polanski called for rent brakes to give people 'breathing space'
The Greens’ deputy leaders are due to address members on Day 2 of their conference in Brighton shortly, and we’ll have a live stream of those remarks in the top of our blog.
But yesterday, party leader Zach Polanski used his conference speech to introduce a key new policy, calling for a “three-year emergency brake on private rents”.
No rent rises above CPI wage growth or 2%, whichever is lower. No sudden hikes. No evictions under the guise of rent rises. No more uncertainty, no more fear.

  That emergency brake would give renters vital breathing space. Let wages begin to catch up with the rents that have outstripped them for far too long.
 And in the long term, we’ll put in place a national Fair Rents Guarantee – to keep rents affordable for everyone, forever. That doesn’t just mean cheaper homes, it doesn’t just mean government savings.
 It will mean that people can stay in the places they love, close to their family and friends. It will mean young people can take those first amazing, exhilarating steps into independence and have full lives waiting for them on the other side.
 Young families able to live around the corner from the in-laws, not crammed into their spare room.

===== 10.36 BST | Millward calls for immediate takeback of 'failed' water companies
She calls for national takeover of South East Water and Thames Water, without compensation for shareholders. She tells conference:
Burnham’s 10 year plan of gentle threats and vague notions of control is not enough. Too many of our water companies have already failed.
 Right here in Sussex, we too often find ourselves driving to pick up bottled water because nothing is coming out of our taps. 

  Not a single major reservoir has been built in this country since the beginning of privatisation 35 years ago.
 And so, today, the Green Party is announcing that we would, immediately - not in 10 years, but before Christmas, bring South East Water and Thames Water back into public ownership at no cost to the tax payer.
 We have all the tools we need to make it happen. Forget compensation for shareholders and creditors, these are insolvent companies.
Earlier she had laid out the issue:
We see the sewage being pumped into our river by private profit making companies - and we see just how far wrong we’ve gone. 

  Water - the very stuff of life - uniquely found on this planet in the whole wide universe - the stuff we’re made of - it replenishes us, cleans us, connects us… and we — sold it.

===== 10.45 BST | Ali: 'Can we build a country confident enough to live with difference?'
The Greens’ other deputy leader Mothin Ali is delivering his remarks now, praising the party’s growth and noting that the young greens are “the biggest youth political movement in the country.”

 He says:
People making the journey to the green party because they see we offer a real alternative.
 He says people are looking for a different kind of politics that recognises how multicultural the UK is.

  Britain is becoming more diverse, not less. Can we build a country confident enough to live with difference? To protect everyone’s equal right to belong and to make diversity work with us all.

===== 10.49 BST | Ali calls on Burnham to recognise racist displays as 'national emergency'
Ali says Britain is a multiracial, multicultural democracy that needs to protect “everyone’s equal right to belong.”
 At a time when Britain is facing unprecedented levels of racist violence and intimidation, the country needs leadership. 

  So I’m calling on Andy Burnham to recognise this as a national emergency. 

  Because this is not just a policing problem. It’s a test of whether a diverse democracy can protect the equal right of everyone to belong.

===== 10.55 BST | Ali to Braverman: 'I'm brown, Muslim and as English as a cup of tea'
He also singles out Suella Braverman, former Tory Home Secretary and now a Reform spokeswoman, who said on Question Time this week that she doesn’t consider herself to be English because of her Asian heritage.

 She said she identified as British Asian but not “an English person” because her parents were born abroad – sparking widespread outrage.

 “A message to Suella Braveman,” said Ali.
“I’m brown. I’m Muslim, but I’m as English as a Yorkshire cup of tea.”

===== 11.17 BST | Greens pledge 'youth jobs guarantee'
Ali says democracy “means very little without economic security” and launches into announcing a job guarantee for young people, if the Greens were to be in power.

 There are 1 million young people in the UK – roughly one in every seven British people aged 16-24- who are categorised as a Neet (not in education, employment or training).
 Across London, Wales, young people are struggling from Cardiff to Birmingham, from Leeds to Leicester, from Liverpool to Sheffield. They’re forced to compete with a handful of jobs. We need to do better.

 He says that the Greens in power would launch a scheme “providing a guaranteed job for every 18- to 24-year-old lasting up to two years, which start by introducing them into the areas that are worst-hit by usual unemployment”.

He doesn’t list which areas these are and detail is scant on how these jobs would be made and funded, where they’d come from, how they would be implemented.

 He says the new jobs would be aligned with “our critical national missions: a stronger care economy, a green transition, homes for all, and a sustainable food system, a nature recovery”.

===== 11.47 BST | Recap of Greens deputy leader speeches
Those are the main keynote speeches today at the Greens party conference, from deputy leaders Rachel Millward and Mothin Ali who both opened their speeeches with a recap of the party’s significant membership growth particularly among young people.

 There are now more than 200,000 members across England and Wales, making the Greens the third-largest political party.

 “Meeting so many of you on action days around the country, getting more Greens elected, sharing our message on climate, inequality, immigration, trans rights. It’s been a year of hope,” said Millward.

 While the PM at Labour conference last week announced a 10-year plan to renationalise water companies, Millward said this delay was a mistake.

 She called for an immediate buyback of ‘failed’ water companies Thames Water and South-East, amid a broader call for people to take greater power of natural assets to stop tech billionaires like Elon Musk and Peter Thiel and AI CEOs who are “hoarding the world’s wealth, polluting our planet” . She said they were fuelling the climate disaster with energy-guzzling data centres and profiting off misinformation and online division.

 “Andy Burnham talks a lot about reversing 40 years of neoliberalism, but we can’t just look back. We stand on the cusp of unprecedented, technological, and social change.”
Meanwhile Mothin Ali used his speech to call for greater celebrations and protections for “multiracial, multicultural Britain” noting that the country was only growing more diverse and was stronger for it.

 He said the rising levels of racist violence and intimidation though warranted the Burnham government calling a “national emergency”. As I noted earlier, there are scheduled anti-immigration protests to take place on the south coast today.
There needs to be more done to “protect everyone’s equal right to belong, and to make diversity work for us”, said Ali
Live and let live. Now, that’s a simple phrase that I’ve always lived by. But in a diverse democracy, it’s something that’s profound. You don’t have to become your neighbour. You don’t have to worship. You don’t have to vote like them. You don’t even have to agree with them. But you do have to recognise their equal right to insist and to belong… We have to speak to people we disagree with. We have to listen seriously to genuine concerns about immigration, housing, public services, and security. And we need to distinguish between legitimate political argument from the denigration of whole communities.

===== 12.30 BST | Half of UK wants to rejoin the EU, poll suggests
Andy Burnham’s personal preference to rejoin the European Union after the next election is supported by almost half of all voters, a new megapoll has found, although cabinet ministers concerned about reopening Brexit divides are privately urging him to proceed with caution.

  Burnham used his first Labour conference speech as leader on Tuesday to announce a review of the options for Britain’s future relationship with Europe, and subsequently added that these should include rejoining entirely.

  However, there are nerves among some Labour MPs, especially those with constituencies that voted for Brexit, that even testing out public support for the move would be fraught with political risk and a potential boost to Reform.

===== 14.16 BST | Closing summary
We’re going to leave our live coverage there for now.

 I’ll be back tomorrow to take you through the first day of the Conservative party conference and the last day of the Greens’, where members will be voting on a few significant motions.

 But to recap this morning’s pledges from the party’s deputy leaders, who noted the membership growth, particularly among young people, in the past year.
If the Greens were elected into government, they would immediately nationalise Thames and SE Water, as opposed to the 10-year plan outlined by PM Andy Burnham earlier this week which was criticised as too gentle and weak
 
  These “insolvent” companies had polluted and illegally dumped into waterways and are facing billions in debt; deputy leader Rachel Millward called for their imediate buyback
 
  “Right here in Sussex, we’re too often driving to pick up bottled water because nothing is coming out of our taps”
 
  She also suggested that AI technology could be owned by the public instead of by “Silicon Valley proto-fascists” whose products are accelerating climate destruction
 
  Fellow deputy leader Mothin Ali announced a new policy where the Greens would provide guaranteed jobs for every 18-24 year old, if in power.
 
  He also said the Greens was the party championing a multiracial, multicultural Britain which is only growing more diverse.
 
  He called on Andy Burnham to declare a national emergency in response to rising hate displays. “At a time when Britain is facing unprecedented levels of racist violence and intimidation, the country needs leadership”, he said.
 
  “It is a test of whether a diverse democracy can protect the equal right of everyone to belong.”
 
  This afternoon anti-migration protesters are gathering in Southampton and Dover in “Stop the boats” and “Deport them” rallies. Police have issued a ban on face masks following recent weeks’ displays of aggression and intimidation
 
  The Conservative party conference will begin tomorrow and run until Wednesday; the party is pledging childcare benefits for higher earners and cutting back on foreign aid
 
  Reform says the terror plot charge brought against the man accused of Ann Widdecombe’s murder highlights Nigel Farage’s concerns about his safety

