URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cr62y3enq62zo
BBC 13:51: homemade bomb part of alleged plot, court told

Homemade bomb part of alleged plot on Manchester's Jewish community, court told

The suspects were arrested in Manchester on 20 September

A police car and a van and several officers stand guard by a police cordon in a city-centre location.

Two Iranian men have appeared in court charged with terror offences over an alleged plot to target the Jewish community in Manchester with a homemade bomb.

Rahman Salehi, 34, of Salford, and Salam Ahmadyan, 36, from Liverpool, were accused at Westminster Magistrates' Court of preparing to commit an act of terrorism or assisting another to commit an act of terrorism on or before 20 September.

One of the buildings they are alleged to have carried out reconnaissance at is the Heaton Park synagogue which was attacked on 2 October 2025.

Both men, who had arrived in the UK by small boat, were arrested in Manchester's Northern Quarter on the eve of Yom Kippur - the holiest day in the Jewish calendar.

Salehi and Ahmadyan were remanded in custody by District Judge Nina Tempia until 23 October, when they will appear at the Old Bailey in London.

As part of the investigation, searches were carried out at addresses in Epworth Street, Liverpool, and Lancaster Road, Salford.

The Metropolitan Police said the men were alleged to have obtained instructions to make a chlorine bomb, acquired liquids and other components to make an improvised explosive device.

They are accused of using the internet to identify and research potential targets, acquiring images, plans and maps.

Prosecutor Mark Luckett told the court: \"Both defendants are accused of preparing acts of terrorism targeting the Jewish community in Manchester through the use of a homemade explosive device.

\"The defendants were observed carrying out, what the prosecution say, is a hostile reconnaissance within Manchester's Jewish community, identifying attempted targets such as the Jewish Museum and Heaton Park Synagogue.\"

Two British Jews, Melvin Kravitz, 66, and 53-year-old Adrian Daulby, were killed when Heaton Park Synagogue was attacked during last year's Yom Kippur service.

Jihad Al-Shamie, 35, drove into the gates of Heaton Park Hebrew Synagogue and began attacking people with a knife while wearing a fake suicide belt.

Westminster Magistrates' Court court heard Salehi and Ahmadyan, who had come to the UK via a small boat in 2020 and 2023 respectively, were alleged to have been \"directed and co-ordinated\" by another Iranian individual \"most likely operating within Iran\".

Salehi had previously claimed asylum in Germany and spent five years there, the court heard. He was granted asylum in the UK in 2023 and currently has leave to remain until July 2028.

His co-accused arrived via small boat in 2023 and has an outstanding asylum claim, the court heard.

The men, wearing grey tracksuits, stood in the dock of court five.

Salehi and Ahmadyan respectively spoke through their Kurdish and Farsi translators only to confirm their name, date of birth and addresses.

Prior to their court appearance, Home Secretary Shabana Mahmood said the news that two Iranian men had been charged would be \"deeply distressing\" to Manchester's Jewish community as the city marked the first anniversary of the Heaton Park Synagogue attack.

She said \"the fact both suspects arrived by small boat several years ago\" was a reminder of the \"importance of work to tackle illegal migration\".

\"We will be unrelenting in our efforts to protect our Jewish communities, root out antisemitism in this country, and maintain our border security,\" she added.

Tell us which stories we should cover in Greater Manchester

Listen to the best of BBC Radio Manchester on Sounds and follow BBC Manchester on Facebook, X, and Instagram. You can also send story ideas via Whatsapp to 0808 100 2230.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.