URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c6d095ygggv1o
BBC 11:58: UK-Iranian arrested over RAF Fairford, bailed

UK-Iranian dual national arrested over RAF Fairford released on bail

Two armed police officers posted outside RAF Fairford base on September 27. There is a police car, a police stop sign and two officers looking straight ahead

A UK-Iranian dual national arrested on suspicion of preparation of terrorist acts in connection with an incident at RAF Fairford has been released on bail.

The 25-year-old man was arrested in the London borough of Westminster on Thursday. Searches of two properties in the same area have now finished.

A major incident was declared and dozens of homes were evacuated after police were alerted to three \"suspicious vehicles\" near the airbase in Gloucestershire last weekend.

Five other men in their twenties were arrested and were subsequently released on police bail. All five were UK nationals from London.

The investigation into the circumstances surrounding the events are continuing, police said.

Last weekend, the five men aged between 23 and 25 were arrested in the early hours of the morning after vehicles were reported to be travelling towards the base operated by the US Air Force (USAF), sparking a major security incident.

The BBC understands that one of the men had dialled 999 himself, about an hour before a local farmer alerted police to a \"large group\" of masked men near the vehicles.

They were arrested on suspicion of explosives offences and later on suspicion of preparing a terrorist act, before being released on bail on Monday in what police called an \"investigative decision\" that was \"grounded in experience and strategy\".

Prime Minister Andy Burnham chaired a Cobra meeting that afternoon in response. He later said there were \"strong indications\" that Iran had played a part in the incident, but did not provide any more details.

Tehran has strongly denied any involvement. The Iranian embassy in London said on Monday that it \"categorically rejects and strongly condemns\" what it called \"unfounded and malicious speculations\" linking Iran to the incident.

I saw masked men, farmer who called 999 says

RAF Fairford has been used as a forward operating location by the US Air Force (USAF) for decades.

In recent months, US bombers have taken off from the base for the Middle East, after the UK approved a US request to use it for defensive strikes on Iran.

In July, Iran said \"any base used for aggression against Iranian territory constitutes a legitimate target for our forces\".

Late on Monday, US Secretary of State Marco Rubio told a TV show that it was clear a \"foreign actor\" had been involved in events over the weekend.

Without providing evidence or giving further details, he told Fox News network's \"Hannity\" programme: \"What happened, what almost happened, what could have happened in the UK over the weekend is a very serious situation. It's one that clearly involves the hands of a foreign actor.\"

Speaking earlier at the Oval Office, US President Donald Trump said he would not have let the five men arrested out on bail, and that he was \"surprised\" they had been released.

\"We know everything about them, we would not have released them,\" he said, adding that the UK had worked with the US \"very closely\" on this.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.