URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/crje52vpqwdyo
BBC News front pages review, published Sat 3 Oct 2026 05:06 BST

'G7 strikes oil deal' and 'Alison's  TV heart scare'

A composite of the front pages of the Times and the Daily Mirror on 3 October 2026.

Spoiler warning: This press review reveals details from series two of The Celebrity Traitors.

The G7 striking an oil deal with Donald Trump features in today's papers. The Times reports on the agreement by G7 countries to release 100 million barrels of \"emergency stockpiles of fuel and avert a US export ban\". \"The price of diesel at the pump is expected to fall\", the paper says, after countries including France, Germany and Italy agreed to release a \"massive amount\" of diesel to ease supply pressures. The US president had warned he would ban diesel exports from the US if European countries did not offer up more of their own stocks onto the market.

John Healey's first Budget this month will likely create \"breathing space\" for households and businesses by focusing on the cost of living, the Financial Times reports. According to the paper, Healy is set to ease costs rather than \"impose tax increases of the scale seen in recent years\". Elsewhere in the paper, the G7 agreement on releasing \"more diesel reserves\" is headlined along with British pumps passing £2 a litre.

The United Arab Emirates has warned the UK Prime Minister it will cut billions of pounds of investment to Britain in retaliation for the Manchester City guilty verdict, according to the Daily Telegraph. The paper describes the \"diplomatic row\" as a \"major test\" for Andy Burnham and follows comments the PM made on how he was \"really concerned\" if the club's owners decided to sell up. Man City were found guilty by an independent commission of most of the 115 charges they faced relating to breaches of the Premier League's financial regulations. The club has continued to deny any wrongdoing.

The i Paper reports on No 10 feeling the heat amid the \"Man City scandal\". According to the paper, Manchester City's chairman met with a senior UK cabinet minister two weeks before the guilty verdicts to discuss UAE's future investments in Britain.

The man accused of murdering Ann Widdecombe is featured in the Sun. Joshua Kerry, 28, has now also been charged with a terror offence against Reform UK leader Nigel Farage, the paper reports. The charge relates to activity which is alleged to have taken place between May 2024 and July 2026.

The Tories have unveiled plans to \"slash foreign aid\" to instead \"fund 50,000 new jail cells\", according to the Daily Mail, which underlines that number in its front page headline. In a move to \"reverse Labour's soft-justice approach\", Kemi Badenoch has vowed to increase the size of prison estates by 50% by cutting the \"foreign aid budget to just £1 billion a year\", the paper reports.

British TV presenter Alison Hammond's \"heart scare\" makes the Daily Mirror front page after the 51-year-old was rushed off midway through This Morning's Friday show while clutching her chest. Hammond later said \"I'm getting my old ticker checked out,\" according to the paper.

The Daily Star splashes on Oasis's Liam Gallagher saying he'll sing Manchester City's Blue Moon during his 2027 tour as \"the club appeals in the FA 'sham' contracts decision\". The band recently announced they will start a second leg of their successful reunion tour over next summer.

The Guardian headlines on \"School inspections to be overhauled yet again\" after the new system was labelled \"dangerously stressful\" and \"damaging teachers' mental health\". Education Secretary Lucy Powell will direct the schools regulator, Ofsted, to \"go back to the drawing board\" after changes made by her predecessor only created more problems for headteachers, the paper says.

And the Daily Express claims in an exclusive that a new medal for \"999 heroes\" injured during service is set to be approved by King Charles. Elsewhere on the front page, two contestants from this season of the Celebrity Traitors, Maya Jama and Richard E Grant, are pictured scheming in their iconic green cloaks.

The Sun leads on the terror charges brought against the man accused of killing Reform UK spokeswoman Ann Widdecombe. The paper says the police are linking Joshua Kerry to an alleged firebomb attack on the party leader, Nigel Farage's home last year. \"Ann suspect on Nigel terror rap\" reads its headline.

The Times says the price of diesel at the pump is expected to fall, after European leaders struck a deal with Donald Trump to release emergency stockpiles of fuel. The report says that would avert a US export ban, previously threatened by the President.

Conservative leader Kemi Badenoch says her party would cut foreign aid to pay for 50,000 new jail cells, according to the Daily Mail. The paper calls it the biggest prison-building programme since the Victorian era.

The Daily Telegraph says the United Arab Emirates has threatened to pull billions of pounds of investment out of the UK, in retaliation for Manchester City being found to have broken Premier League financial rules. Its report says in the weeks before the verdict was announced the business secretary, Jonathan Reynolds, held a meeting with the club's chairman, but the Department for Business insists the two men didn't discuss football.

The Financial Times says Chancellor John Healey's first Budget this month is expected to provide \"breathing space\" for households and businesses, rather than impose tax rises. The paper says big decisions have been parked until next year and that Labour insiders have said Healey's main aim is to reassure investors. One senior party figure is quoted as saying \"it won't be a blow-the-doors-off budget\".

School inspections in England will be changed for the second time in a year according to the Guardian. The paper says the new system - introduced after the death of a headteacher - has received a barrage of complaints that it's damaging school leaders' mental health. Education Secretary Lucy Powell will reportedly tell the regulator, Ofsted, to \"go back to the drawing board\".

The Daily Mirror leads on what it calls the TV presenter, Alison Hammond's \"heart scare\". The 51-year-old was rushed off air after clutching her chest during This Morning yesterday. Its front-page features a picture of Hammond in her hospital bed, who later said she was getting her \"old ticker checked out\".

Sign up for our morning newsletter and get BBC News in your inbox.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Former Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson recalls his recovery from the near-fatal brain haemorrhage he suffered in 2018.

READ MORE: Ferguson on being 'terrified' by brain haemorrhage and 'fantastic' return to Man Utd