URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c83vqxzdg1yko
BBC News, published Sat 3 Oct 2026 06:27 BST

Russia strikes second major bridge in Kyiv, mayor says

The Northern Bridge is the second major bridge to be targeted by Russia in recent days, Kyiv's mayor said

A view of the Pivnichnyi Bridge in Kyiv, Ukraine. There are cars driving across it and water running below with orange and green trees lining the banks.

A Russian strike has hit a second major bridge in Kyiv, Mayor Vitali Klitschko has said, as Russia ramps up attacks on critical infrastructure in the Ukrainian capital.

The attack on Saturday morning damaged the road surface and trolleybus overhead wires on the Northern Bridge, Klitschko said.

The strike comes after another key bridge in the city, Southern Bridge, has been targeted multiple times by Russian drones since Thursday, with Klitschko earlier warning that such attacks were \"tearing Kyiv apart\".

The two bridges link the eastern and western parts of the capital and had not been hit before Thursday, signalling a new stage in Moscow's attacks.

In the Thursday attack, a Russian drone hit cables of Kyiv's Pivdennyi bridge

Writing on Telegram on Saturday, Klitschko said: \"Hitting the North Bridge. Emergency services are on their way.\"

\"Traffic on the bridge from the left to the right bank is currently blocked,\" he added.

Earlier attacks on the Southern Bridge prompted Kyiv's defence council to hold a crisis meeting on Friday.

Following the meeting, Klitschko said the city was now in a \"very dramatic situation\" as Moscow was battering its \"critical infrastructure, logistics, housing\" and other key facilities.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has said Russia is acting in response to Ukraine's strikes on Russian energy facilities, despite the fact that it was Moscow that had first launched such attacks.

After the Southern Bridge was attacked on Thursday, passengers described how dust from a blast wave entered their carriage through the ventilation system.

Metro trains were suspended but road traffic was eventually allowed to resume.

Similar disruption continued on Friday following further strikes.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Former Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson recalls his recovery from the near-fatal brain haemorrhage he suffered in 2018.

READ MORE: Ferguson on being 'terrified' by brain haemorrhage and 'fantastic' return to Man Utd