URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cqx29nke55kno
BBC News, published Fri 2 Oct 2026 21:38 BST

Men charged over alleged plot to target Manchester Jewish community

They will appear at Westminster Magistrates' Court on Saturday

A police car and a van and several officers stand guard by a police cordon in a city-centre location.

Two Iranian nationals who arrived in the UK by small boat have been charged with terror offences over an alleged plot to target the Jewish community in Manchester.

Rahman Salehi, 34, of Salford, and Salam Ahmadyan, 36, from Liverpool, are accused of preparing to commit an act of terrorism or assisting another to commit an act of terrorism on or before 20 September.

The men were arrested in Manchester's Northern Quarter on the eve of Yom Kippur, considered the holiest day in the Jewish calendar.

Home Secretary Shabana Mahmood said news that two Iranian men had been charged over the alleged plot would be \"deeply distressing\" to Manchester's Jewish community, as the city marks one year since the Heaton Park Synagogue attack.

Counter Terrorism Police (CTP) allege the two men were in contact with a third-party overseas, who may be in Iran, in relation to the plot.

According to CTP, the men are accused of obtaining instructions to make a chlorine bomb, acquiring liquids, components and equipment for such a device, researching potential targets and conducting reconnaissance of potential locations for attack.

Home Secretary Shabana Mahmood said the suspects had arrived via small boat in 2020 and 2023. One was granted asylum, and the other has a live asylum claim.

She added: \"These recent events are a stark reminder of the threats posed against this country from both terrorists and foreign state actors.

\"Two suspects have been charged with planning a terrorist attack against Jewish communities in Manchester.

\"This news will be deeply distressing for our Jewish communities, coming so soon after Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur.

\"I know this will be especially true in Manchester, as we mark one year since the terrorist attack at Heaton Park Synagogue.

\"The fact both suspects arrived by small boat several years ago is a reminder of the importance of our relentless work to tackle illegal migration into this country. While numbers are down, I know there is more we must do.

\"It would be inappropriate to comment further on this case. But I can say that we will be unrelenting in our efforts to protect our Jewish communities, root out antisemitism in this country, and maintain our border security.\"

Searches were carried out at addresses in Liverpool and Salford

As part of the investigation, searches were carried out at addresses in Epworth Street, Liverpool, and Lancaster Road, Salford.

Greater Manchester Police's Deputy Chief Constable, Terry Woods, said: \"We know this is particularly acute on the calendar anniversary of last year's terrorist atrocity at the Heaton Park synagogue, and during the Jewish High Holy days.

\"Our ongoing and robust policing plans within the Jewish communities will endure, and the public can expect to see continued visibility with officers providing engagement and security.\"

The men are due to appear at Westminster Magistrates' Court on Saturday.

Tell us which stories we should cover in Greater Manchester

Listen to the best of BBC Radio Manchester on Sounds and follow BBC Manchester on Facebook, X, and Instagram. You can also send story ideas via Whatsapp to 0808 100 2230.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Former Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson recalls his recovery from the near-fatal brain haemorrhage he suffered in 2018.

READ MORE: Ferguson on being 'terrified' by brain haemorrhage and 'fantastic' return to Man Utd