URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cv1j3lgrl6gko
BBC News, published Fri 2 Oct 2026 21:32 BST

Widdecombe suspect charged with planning terror act against Farage

Joshua Kerry has been charged with preparing acts of terror including against Reform UK leader Nigel Farage.

A photo of Joshua Kerry, a man with shoulder-length brown hair, a beard and glasses, from the shoulders up. He is smiling at the camera, wearing a khaki shirt, and behind him is a whiteboard.

The man accused of murdering Ann Widdecombe has also been charged with preparing acts of terror including against Reform UK leader Nigel Farage.

Counter terror police said Joshua Kerry, 28, was charged on Friday with one count of preparation of terrorist acts.

The charge relates to activity which is alleged to have taken place between May 2024 and July 2026.

Kerry was charged in July with the murder of 78-year-old Widdecombe, a former Conservative minister and Reform UK spokeswoman.

Home Secretary Shabana Mahmood said she knew the fresh charge would be \"extremely concerning\" and her \"profound sympathies\" were with Farage and his family.

\"Let no one make any mistake: an attack on anyone in politics is an attack on us all.

\"This case raises serious questions about the security of those in public life. We must use this as an opportunity to reset. Once parliament returns, I will update on our work to strengthen protections for those who choose to serve.\"

The BBC contacted Reform UK for comment and a party source said: \"This is exactly why Nigel needed £5m to protect his security for life.\"

Farage is currently facing a parliamentary standards watchdog probe into a £5m gift from a billionaire donor before he returned as an MP in 2024. The Reform leader has previously said the money was for his personal security.

Counter Terrorism Policing Deputy Assistant Commissioner Vicki Evans said the charge on Friday was the result of a \"hugely intensive and complex investigation\".

\"This investigation has been led by a dedicated team of detectives, analysts, and forensic experts, working on multiple lines of enquiry, which has resulted in this very serious charge,\" she added.

Kerry, from Rotherham, is due to appear in court over the terror charge on Wednesday, police said.

Frank Ferguson of the Crown Prosecution Service's Special Crime and Counter Terrorism Division said prosecutors \"worked closely\" with police to bring the charge and would continue to work alongside them as the investigation continued.

Widdecombe was found dead on Thursday 9 July at her home in Haytor, Devon, having sustained serious injuries.

She served as Conservative MP for Maidstone in Kent for 23 years and was appointed to ministerial roles in Sir John Major's government in the 1990s.

Following her departure from the Commons, Widdecombe appeared on the BBC's Strictly Come Dancing and would later become a Reform UK spokeswoman.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Former Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson recalls his recovery from the near-fatal brain haemorrhage he suffered in 2018.

READ MORE: Ferguson on being 'terrified' by brain haemorrhage and 'fantastic' return to Man Utd