URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2026/sep/24/netanyahu-mamdani-abbas-trump-unga-un-general-assembly-speech-new-york-israel-palestine-latest-updates
Guardian — UNGA live blog, last updated 24 Sep 2026 18:08 BST (13:08 EDT); first published 11:32 BST

HEADLINE: Palestinian delegation was unlawfully denied entry visas, Mahmoud Abbas tells UN

Mahmoud Abbas, president of the Palestinian Authority, addressed the 81st UN General Assembly via pre-recorded video for the second year running, after the Trump administration refused him a visa.

QUOTE (Abbas): "For the second consecutive year, the Palestinian delegation was denied the entry visas required to reach New York and participate in the meetings of the United Nations General Assembly in person. We reject these unlawful punitive measures, and we reject the accusations and justifications on which they were based."

The US state department said the Palestinian Authority and the PLO had "failed to live up to their commitments", accusing them of "taking actions to internationalise the Israeli-Palestinian conflict including through the international criminal court and international court of justice" and of "glorifying terrorism".
State Dept statement: https://www.state.gov/releases/office-of-the-spokesman/2026/09/sanctioning-officials-of-the-palestinian-authority-and-members-of-the-palestine-liberation-organization-2/

QUOTE (Abbas): "I speak to you today as the Palestinian people faces one of the most dangerous times of its history."
QUOTE (Abbas): "We will not leave our homeland, we will not accept displacement, and we will not allow anyone to decide our future on our behalf."
QUOTE (Abbas, on Trump's 20-point Gaza peace plan): "Regretfully, we have not seen any of this materialise on the ground. The Israeli killing and aggression continue to claim the lives of men, women and children in Gaza. Nearly a year has passed since the adoption of [the peace plan] and the establishment of the Board of Peace. And only one year remains of the designated transitional period before the end of 2027."
Abbas called for acceleration of phase two, warning the transitional period "must not be allowed to become a permanent or open-ended situation without any clear time bound political horizon", and for reunification of Gaza and the West Bank including East Jerusalem under the State of Palestine — "one state, one government".
Abbas accused Israel of seeking to "expand its colonial project towards establishing the so-called Greater Israel and completely erasing Palestinian presence". He thanked the UK for measures taken "in order to protect the two-state solution" and for banning settlement products.

NETANYAHU: arrived in New York Thursday morning; scheduled to address the UNGA at approximately 2pm EDT (19:00 BST) / 9pm Israel time. No meeting with Trump scheduled. Expected to attack New York City mayor Zohran Mamdani. Former Israeli ambassador Michael Oren said he expected the address to resemble a "campaign speech". Protests staged in New York ahead of the speech (Guardian photos, AP images).
NOTE: as of this scrape (18:08 BST) the speech had NOT yet been delivered.

ZELENSKYY: A video circulating shows a Russian state journalist repeatedly asking Volodymyr Zelenskyy in Russian when he will visit Moscow, as he walked with security in New York. Per Meduza, Zelenskyy replied over his shoulder "on a rocket", apparently followed by an obscenity. Meduza identified the journalist as Valentin Bogdanov of Russian state broadcaster VGTRK. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov responded at a briefing today: "Zelenskyy didn't refuse to come to Moscow; at least, I haven't heard that," according to Tass.

ANTONIO COSTA (President of the European Council): said Russia's escalation of the war has been "unacceptable".
QUOTE (Costa): "This was a war chosen by Russia, the consequences of which are worldwide in scope."
QUOTE (Costa): "It is unacceptable that over the last 12 months that Russia has on several occasions threatened the security of several European Union member states. Russia must bring an end to this escalation."
Costa said the international community "must do their utmost to bring an end to this war". "This war must end. The same goes for the Middle East." "The two state solution is the only one that can ensure lasting peace in the Middle East."
On AI: "We need an AI that serves humanity, not controls it." He said the UN should set "global standards" on AI governance.

HUNGARY President Andras Baka: "A lasting peace must respect Ukraine's sovereignty. If taking territory by force becomes an accepted way of settling disputes, every smaller country will have reasons to worry about its own future."

ZIMBABWE President Emmerson Mnangagwa: told the hall the world faces a "pivotal moment", with conflicts spreading, climate shocks intensifying and technological advances outpacing the rules governing them.

OTHER: Plans for a global UN body on inequality modelled on the IPCC likely to be proposed to the UNGA in coming months; Germany and Japan have given public backing; recommended by Joseph Stiglitz in a report commissioned by South Africa for its G20 chairing last November.
Guardian sidebar: Iran and Ukraine foreign ministers met on the sidelines of the general assembly (5h ago).
