URL: https://apnews.com/article/iran-us-israel-yemen-houthis-hormuz-un-september-24-2026-8d8f9e371ad3772420f534ed86fc3eac
AP (Associated Press) — updated 24 Sep 2026, 12:40 PM EDT = 17:40 BST

HEADLINE: Netanyahu arrives in New York to address the UN, and other Mideast developments

Israel's increasingly isolated Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was in New York on Thursday to address the United Nations General Assembly, but no meeting with US President Donald Trump was planned.

NETANYAHU VISIT: The Israeli prime minister's brief stay includes meetings with several world leaders — but not Trump, US Secretary of State Marco Rubio or Arab leaders. Netanyahu's office said he was on a "tight schedule" and needed to return to Israel before the start of the Jewish holiday of Sukkot at sundown Friday. He will meet the presidents of Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay, Panama and Ethiopia, the vice president of Colombia, and the prime ministers of Greece, Slovenia and Papua New Guinea, according to his office.

HAMAS / GAZA RECONSTRUCTION: A Hamas spokesman said the group is ready to move forward with the next steps of a peace agreement, after Trump's Board of Peace unveiled a six-month, $2.45-billion plan for Gaza's reconstruction. Hamas spokesman Hazem Qassem expressed the group's "full readiness to implement the Board of Peace's roadmap" but made no mention of any disarmament plans. Israel has said it will not allow reconstruction until Hamas disarms. A top EU official said only 1 billion euros ($1.1 billion) has been raised of the 71 billion euros ($80.8 billion) that the UN, the World Bank and the 27-nation EU estimate are needed to rebuild Gaza.

YEMEN / UN: The UN pleaded for fast delivery of humanitarian aid in Yemen as fighting between Iran-backed Houthi rebels and Saudi-backed government forces intensifies. UN Human Rights Chief Volker Turk said people fleeing violence need access to food, shelter and healthcare. Ground fighting, artillery and aerial strikes have killed and wounded at least 125 civilians since the beginning of August. Turk also called for the release of 73 UN staffers detained by the Houthis in the past few years.

IRAN DIPLOMACY: Iranian Foreign Minister Seyed Abbas Araghchi's official Telegram channel shared photos of brief, informal meetings between him and the foreign ministers of Jordan, Tajikistan, Armenia and Saudi Arabia, as well as the Prince of Brunei, on the sidelines of the UNGA. After talks with US representatives earlier this week, Araghchi faced criticism from some hard-liners in Iran.

HOUTHI ATTACKS ON SAUDI ARABIA: Iran-backed Houthi rebels say they fired dozens of ballistic missiles and drones on Saudi Arabia's southwestern Jazan province. Houthi military spokesman Brig. Gen. Yahya Saree said the rebels targeted operations rooms, command centres, weapons depots and other Saudi military sites; he didn't say when the attacks took place. AP could not independently confirm the claims. A Saudi military spokesman, Maj. Gen. Turki al-Malki, said six ballistic missiles targeting Saudi Arabia's Red Sea port of Yanbu and southwestern city of Taif were intercepted.

GAZA STRIKES: Al-Aqsa Hospital said a man was killed when a car was hit on Thursday in Deir al Balah. There were also injuries in strikes in the southern city of Khan Younis, the hospital said. The Israeli military said it struck operatives in both places.

TURKEY/SYRIA EARTHQUAKE: A magnitude 5.4 earthquake shook southeast Turkey and parts of Syria on Thursday, sending people rushing out of buildings. Centred in Sanliurfa province near the Syrian border, per Turkey's Disaster and Emergency Management Agency (AFAD). No immediate reports of damage. In 2023 a magnitude 7.8 quake killed more than 53,000 in Turkey and 6,000 in Syria.
