URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/flush-with-allies-tigrays-leaders-face-internal-discord-new-ethiopia-war-2026-09-24/
Reuters — published 24 Sep 2026 16:50 BST, updated 18:17 BST (Nairobi, by Aaron Ross)

HEADLINE: Flush with allies, Tigray's leaders face internal discord in new Ethiopia war

The TPLF enters a new conflict with Addis Ababa following the outbreak of fighting on Wednesday.
On Sunday it announced an alliance with six other Ethiopian armed groups aimed at overthrowing Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed's government. Regional experts widely believe it is receiving support from neighbouring Eritrea; Asmara denies this.
Since the end of the last war in 2022 the TPLF has faced protests over dire economic conditions, rival parties and defections.

NEW OVERNIGHT: Armed men detained four veteran military leaders who had expressed doubts about the new war, including the commander-in-chief of Tigrayan forces during the last war, Tadesse Werede, a member of Tadesse's family told Reuters.

QUOTE (Jalale Getachew Birru, East Africa regional expert, Armed Conflict Location & Event Data project / ACLED): "Previously, TPLF had very large support within the region, within the country, as well as from outside of the country, the diaspora. And they also managed to mobilize the local people to join TDF (Tigray Defense Forces). But this time... we don't see all these things."

Abiy's spokesperson declined to comment. A TPLF spokesperson did not respond to a request for comment.

Wednesday's developments: Tigrayan forces seized control of the region's main airports and attacked federal forces in two neighbouring regions as part of what they called a defensive war in response to federal government aggression — shattering the four-year-old peace deal that ended one of the century's deadliest civil wars.

The African Union-mediated Pretoria Agreement was signed in November 2022.
In recent months Tigrayan authorities have turned to forcibly recruiting young men into the defence forces, according to local and international human rights groups, opposition parties and multiple Tigray residents. The TPLF denies forced recruitment.

QUOTE (Mekelle resident, unnamed, to Reuters): "At the beginning of the previous war, despite political disagreements, there was a strong sense of collective mobilization around the defence of Tigray. Today that social cohesion has been severely weakened. Tigray is politically polarized, and people are increasingly being divided into categories of 'patriots' and 'traitors.'"

The new alliance includes former foe the Amhara Fano National Movement; since Wednesday they have been fighting together in Amhara, security sources told Reuters. Fano has waged an insurgency there since 2023.
The federal government has accused Eritrea of providing financial support to the TPLF and other armed groups.

QUOTE (Kjetil Tronvoll, professor of peace and conflict studies, Oslo New University College): "The only issue joining them is their opposition to (Abiy's) Prosperity Party rule."

QUOTE (Magnus Taylor, Horn of Africa analyst, International Crisis Group): "The TPLF look weaker than previously as their forces are depleted since the end of the last war. However, the alliances with other opposition groups, plus support from other regional states ... could offset this to some degree."

The federal government has bolstered drone stocks including domestic production; the TPLF surrendered weaponry under the Pretoria Agreement.

RELATED REUTERS (seen on page, ~18:35 BST): "Flights suspended to Ethiopian holy town of Lalibela as fighting expands" https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/residents-ethiopias-tigray-region-stock-up-fear-return-full-scale-war-2026-09-24/
Also: "Sudan's RSF steps up deadly drone attacks on frontline cities" https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/sudans-rsf-steps-up-deadly-drone-attacks-frontline-cities-2026-09-24/
Also: "Seven Ethiopian armed groups announce anti-government alliance" (21 Sep) https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/seven-ethiopian-armed-groups-announce-anti-government-alliance-2026-09-21/
