URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/china/trump-welcomes-xi-washington-looking-trade-win-2026-09-24/
Reuters — published 24 Sep 2026 06:02 BST, updated 18:35 BST

HEADLINE: Trump-Xi summit in Washington begins with great fanfare but low expectations

WASHINGTON, Sept 24 (Reuters) - US President Donald Trump welcomed Chinese President Xi Jinping to the White House on Thursday for a lavish state summit expected to be heavy on symbolism but light on substance, with both leaders keen to showcase stable ties despite a host of thorny issues such as AI, trade, Taiwan and the war with Iran.

The subject of Taiwan, perhaps the most difficult, came up during a bilateral meeting in which Xi urged the US to oppose "Taiwan independence," according to a readout from the official Chinese news agency Xinhua shortly after it concluded. The White House did not immediately provide its own readout of the discussion.

Xi had been expected to press Trump this week to halt arms sales to Taiwan. Following his visit to China in May, Trump said he was holding in abeyance an arms package to Taiwan worth some $14 billion and called it a "very good negotiating chip."

Earlier on Thursday at the White House, Trump touted his "truly great friendship" with Xi and said the two powers had made strides on trade since his trip to China in May.

QUOTE (Trump): "During this visit, we will also discuss pressing issues concerning security, technology, and 'super intelligence'. The decisions we make in these areas today can promote peace and prosperity for decades and decades to come."

Speaking after Trump, Xi said the competition between the US and China should be a "healthy one." US companies were welcome in China, he said, adding that he hopes "Chinese companies are treated fairly here in the United States." Xi also said both militaries should maintain regular dialogue to improve crisis prevention.

QUOTE (Xi): "The Thucydides trap can be overcome."

The summit, Xi's first visit to Washington in more than a decade, is the second meeting this year between the leaders of the world's two biggest economies.

Trump and Xi's remarks were not carried live by any US television networks, which have collectively declined to provide footage in protest of the White House's ban of CNN, MS Now and Politico.

Trump greeted Xi on arrival on Wednesday evening with a red carpet on the tarmac, the first time a US president has welcomed a foreign leader at Joint Base Andrews since President Barack Obama met Pope Francis in 2015, according to C-SPAN.

Following their remarks on Thursday, the two leaders observed a military ceremony including a flyover at the Rose Garden, with Chinese flags waving from the Oval Office roof alongside US flags, before a scheduled bilateral meeting.

Trump's embrace of Xi could complicate his campaign message at home ahead of November's midterm elections.

Tangible outcomes potentially limited to an extension of a trade truce expiring in November and an agreement to examine threats posed by artificial intelligence. US Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent told Fox News on Wednesday after talks with Chinese Vice Premier He Lifeng that they had agreed to extend until January 10 an agreement that paused a trade war that saw mutual tariffs top 100%.

Trump wrote in a Truth Social post on Thursday morning that the two leaders would discuss "super intelligence" but again indicated he has little interest in imposing new regulations.
QUOTE (Trump, Truth Social): "Super Intelligence (SI) will be a big topic of discussion, but I want to leave it exactly where it is. That is China's position also."

QUOTE (Xi): both countries have "the capability and responsibility to develop and manage AI for good, and ensure that the development of AI is always under human control."

People familiar with the plans say the talks could also yield deals to lower some tariffs, combat drug trafficking and expand military-to-military dialogue, while Trump is expected to seek the release of Americans and others detained in China.

Xi appears to be in a stronger position, having overseen a surge in China's trade and firmly in control of supplies of rare earth minerals.

The guest list for Thursday's state dinner includes CEOs like Apple's Tim Cook, Amazon's Jeff Bezos, Alphabet's Sundar Pichai, OpenAI's Sam Altman, Tesla's Elon Musk and Nvidia's Jensen Huang, but people familiar with US plans say Trump is likely to maintain firm export controls on US tech Xi wants loosened.

RELATED REUTERS HEADLINES SEEN ON PAGE:
- "China's Xi says pandas will soon arrive in Atlanta" (Reuters, 24 Sep, 17:58 BST) https://www.reuters.com/world/china/chinas-xi-says-pandas-will-soon-arrive-atlanta-2026-09-24/
- "Australia says OpenAI agent hacked government website, checks for more breaches" https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/australia-pm-albanese-says-openai-breached-medicare-sydney-morning-herald-2026-09-23/
- "AI leaders warn UN of security risks as systems grow more powerful" https://www.reuters.com/business/ai-leaders-brief-un-amid-warnings-technology-could-slip-beyond-human-control-2026-09-23/
- "Politico denied access to White House after judge's order, news outlet says" https://www.reuters.com/business/media-telecom/politico-denied-access-white-house-after-judges-order-news-outlet-says-2026-09-24/
- "Costa Rican Foreign Minister dismissed after attending a Trump security meeting" https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/costa-rican-foreign-minister-dismissed-after-attending-trump-security-meeting-2026-09-24/
