URL: https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2026/sep/24/labour-reform-conservatives-yougov-mrp-poll-burnham-badenoch-farage-blair-brexit-latest-news-updates
Guardian politics live (Andrew Sparrow) — post filed ~15:00 BST, Thursday 24 September 2026.

SOURCING CAVEAT: Badenoch's remarks were made in an interview with GB News, which is a BANNED source for The Daily Brief. The Guardian (approved) reports the quotes. Use only if Ed is comfortable with second-hand reporting by an approved outlet; do not name the original broadcaster.

HEADLINE: Kemi Badenoch rules out any electoral pact with Reform UK, saying it is "about character" and that "problematic" ex-Tories have gone to Reform.

FACTS (Guardian):
- Badenoch has ruled out a pre-election pact before, but the Tories have generally been less willing than Labour to accuse Reform UK of sleaze.
- Reform UK is being investigated by police over allegations it accepted donations impermissible under electoral law. Nigel Farage is being investigated by the parliamentary commissioner for standards over claims he broke Commons rules by not declaring a £5m donation from Christopher Harborne. Farage and the party deny wrongdoing. Robert Jenrick also has donations being investigated.
- She was visiting Cleanology in London with shadow work and pensions secretary Helen Whately.

QUOTES (Badenoch, via the Guardian):
"What I have said is that it's about uniting the country, not just uniting the right. Uniting the country behind common sense is what Conservatives want to do."
"There was actually another poll about two weeks ago that showed that if you have a coalition, some of the people who are supporting you will go elsewhere. So you can't just add those two groups together and assume that you're getting a block vote on the centre right."
"What are we uniting about? It's not just policy; it's also character."
"And when I look at the things that Reform are doing, we saw that exposé. Of course, they deny it. But Nigel Farage is under investigation. That £5m, the money. Robert Jenrick has donations being investigated. We just don't want this any more. People saw the Conservative party doing all sorts of things that they didn't like, and I said, I'm coming in to clean this up. Many of the problematic people have gone to Reform. How can we then join with them?"
"I want people to see that the Conservative party is getting its act together. We know we got a lot of things wrong. I wasn't there for the whole 14 years. I was there for half of it. I did what I could, but I'm in charge now."

RELATED (same blog, 10:35 BST): Guardian story — "Tactical voting at next election could push Reform into fourth place, poll finds" https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2026/sep/24/tactical-voting-uk-election-reform-fourth-place-poll — a YouGov study found 60% of 2024 Lib Dem and Green voters are now willing to back Labour to stop a Reform win. Guardian notes 37% of constituencies are decided by margins of five points or less on the central estimate, rising to 67% of seats projected to be won by Reform UK. Labour would be almost wiped out in Wales on this poll.
