URL: https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/oil-prices-edge-lower-iran-says-it-is-open-diplomacy-end-war-2026-09-24/
Reuters — published 24 Sep 2026 02:17 BST (01:17 UTC), updated 05:32 BST

HEADLINE: Oil prices fall as Iran says it is open to diplomacy to end the war

Summary bullets (Reuters):
- Iran reviews US response to peace proposals, senior Iranian official says
- Bessent says US and China extend trade truce by two months
- US crude inventories rise by 3 million barrels, EIA says

SINGAPORE, Sept 24 (Reuters) - Oil prices retreated on Thursday after climbing 4% in the previous session as Iran said it remained open to diplomacy to end the US-Iran war, though the two countries remain far apart on ways to do so.

Brent crude futures fell 92 cents, or 0.9%, to $102.16 a barrel at 0400 GMT, while West Texas Intermediate futures eased 77 cents, or 0.8%, to $91.39.

Iran and the United States remain divided over how to bring an end to their war, but diplomacy must continue, a senior Iranian official told Reuters on Wednesday, after Iran's president told the UN General Assembly that Tehran would never surrender to US pressure.

The official said Tehran was reviewing Washington's response to its peace proposals, which prioritise lifting a US naval blockade on Iranian ports and reopening the Strait of Hormuz.

QUOTE (Priyanka Sachdeva, head of market insights at Phillip Nova):
"Oil is falling because the market is unwinding part of its geopolitical risk premium as Gulf supply recovers and hopes of a US-Iran diplomatic breakthrough grow."
"Brent retains a larger geopolitical and sea-route premium because international crude is more directly exposed to Middle East and Hormuz disruption, while WTI benefits more from relatively insulated US supply."

Earlier on Wednesday, Iran's security chief Mohsen Rezaei said the Strait of Hormuz would not be reopened while Iran's conditions are not met.

US Secretary of State Marco Rubio told reporters on Wednesday that a deal with Iran would involve hard work over a period of time, adding that President Donald Trump also had military options.

Traders also evaluated possible curbs on diesel exports. Ultra-low-sulfur diesel futures were down about 5% in midday trading after website Politico said the Trump administration was preparing plans for a 90-day diesel ban, but the White House denied this.

US Energy Secretary Chris Wright had said earlier on Wednesday that a diesel export ban would not work even though Trump said he would support it.

US distillate stockpiles including diesel and heating oil fell by 428,000 barrels to 107.4 million barrels last week, Energy Information Administration data showed.

Meanwhile, US crude inventories rose by 3 million barrels to 426.4 million barrels last week, though analysts polled by Reuters had expected a 641,000-barrel draw.

Reporting by Jeslyn Lerh in Singapore; Additional reporting by Arathy Somasekhar in Houston.
