URL: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/john-healey-labour-chancellor-confederation-of-british-industry-louise-haigh-b3057270.html
The Independent — Christopher McKeon (PA), "Healey to pledge 'new era of industrialisation' in address to Labour conference", published Monday 28 September 2026 00:01 BST (timestamp confirmed inside the article). Text via Exa search highlights.

John Healey will pledge to take Britain forward into a "new age of industrialisation" when he addresses
the Labour Party conference for the first time as Chancellor on Monday. The former defence secretary is
expected to argue that the UK cannot return to the coal mines of its past, while setting out a positive
economic vision based on modern industry.

Mr Healey, who quit as Sir Keir Starmer's defence secretary in a row over funding for the military, is
also expected to confirm more support for Britain's shipbuilding industry, with investment in the Royal
Navy's Scottish submarine base at its heart. He will confirm that three new floating docks at HM Naval
Base Clyde, Faslane, will be procured through a UK-only competition. Known as Programme Euston, plans
for the new docks were first set out in 2023 and are expected to upgrade Faslane's facilities for the
next generation of British submarines.

The announcement follows a commitment by Louise Haigh, the First Secretary of State, who said on Sunday
the Government would commission a new marine research vessel as part of plans for a "new era of
reindustrialisation". Mr Healey is expected to announce £115 million in funding for the ship, which is
also set to come into service in the early 2030s.

Plans for a new age of industrialisation echo Prime Minister Andy Burnham's pledge to prioritise
"reindustrialisation" as a way of boosting Britain's sluggish growth.

But the Chancellor's conference speech coincides with more gloomy economic news from the Confederation
of British Industry. In a survey published on Monday, the CBI found private sector firms saw falling
activity in the three months up to September, and expect activity to continue to decline for the rest of
the year. Much of that decline was driven by retail and services, with manufacturing declining more
moderately.

CBI deputy chief economist Alpesh Paleja said rising energy and employment costs combined with weak
demand were continuing to put pressure on profit margins. He added: "Uncertainty ahead of next month's
Budget is also holding back activity in some sectors. Against the backdrop of renewed fiscal pressures,
the Budget must draw a clear red line under any more rises in the cost of hiring, investing and doing
business."

Shadow chancellor Andrew Griffith said: "These are more reheated announcements without clarity on where
the money is coming from. Additional docks were announced months ago in the defence investment plan,
which still has a £4.7 billion black hole."

GMB, one of the biggest unions in shipbuilding, has campaigned for Programme Euston to be awarded to
Navantia shipyards in Methil and Belfast, and welcomed the UK-only tender, saying: "Programme Euston is a
potentially transformative contract and promising it will remain in the UK will create optimism not only
in Methil but in yards around the country."
