URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c85ydnwqpzyzo
BBC News — "What we know about RAF Fairford incident and counter-terror probe", published 27 September 2026, 16:20 BST (Exa metadata 2026-09-27T16:20:06Z). Text via Exa search highlights.

Five men have been arrested on suspicion of explosive and terrorism offences after a major incident was
declared at an airbase in the west of England. Bomb disposal teams have been examining a number of
vehicles near RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire and dozens of homes in the surrounding area have been
evacuated.

The base shares a long history with the American military, and has recently been used by US warplanes
as a staging post for defensive strikes on Iran.

Local police said they received a call about "three suspicious vehicles" travelling towards RAF
Fairford at 00:45 BST on Sunday. Five men were later arrested by armed officers near Whelford, a
Cotswold village around two miles (3.2km) south-east of the base.

A bomb disposal team was also deployed to the village to examine a number of vehicles, around which a
400m (1,312ft) cordon has been placed. Aerial pictures showed a remote-controlled robot approaching two
stationary white vans in a wooded area, though its use has not been confirmed by police.

There has been a large emergency service presence in the area since the early hours of Sunday, which
Gloucestershire Police Assistant Chief Constable Richard Ocone said would remain "for some time".

Counter Terrorism Policing are now leading the investigation. Deputy Assistant Commissioner Vicki Evans
said officers were "working closely" with partners to "understand the circumstances of the incident".

The five men were initially detained on suspicion of committing offences under the Explosives Act. They
were then further arrested on suspicion of preparation of a terrorist act.

US President Donald Trump said those arrested were "looking to do big damage", adding: "We had them
under view for a long time, and we got them."
