URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c83v4qe70r0ko

New NHS-style social care system could take decades, Dilnot says

Image source, Getty ImagesByBecky MortonPolitical reporterPublished28 September 2026, 11:10 BST

A new NHS-style social care system for England could take decades to be implemented, economist Sir Andrew Dilnot has told the BBC.

Sir Andrew, who led a commission proposing reform of the system 15 years ago, said Prime Minister Andy Burnham appeared to want social care to be completely free, including residential costs.

He told BBC Radio 4's Today programme the cost of such a scheme would be "very substantial".

And with Burnham promising to put his plans before voters at the next general election, Sir Andrew said change "is now further away".

Adult social care provides state support to help people live more independently, including assistance at home.

However, unlike the NHS, social care is not free at the point of use in England, leaving some people facing huge bills.

In an interview with the BBC's Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg, Burnham suggested his proposals for social care would mean "everyone contributes, everyone is covered" and refused to rule out tax rises to fund such a system.

He promised to set out more details of his vision in his conference speech on Tuesday.

However, he suggested any proposals would not be implemented before the next general election, as he wanted to stick to the commitments in Labour's 2024 election manifesto, which included a promise not to increase national insurance, income tax or VAT.

Labour MP and former minister Darren Jones told Laura Kuenssberg that scrapping the pensions triple lock was an "option that the government should consider alongside others" in order to fund social care reforms.

The triple lock pension policy guarantees that the state pension will increase by either average wage growth, inflation or 2.5% - whichever is highest - and keeping it in place is also a Labour manifesto pledge.

But Helen Miller, director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies think tank, said scrapping the triple lock would not be enough to pay for social care and tax rises would also probably be needed.

The next general election is not due until August 2029, although Burnham could choose to call one earlier.

Sir Andrew told the BBC change on social care "is now further away" than had been implied when Burnham first promised a new national care service for England in a speech in July, shortly after he became prime minister.

He pointed out that if proposals are included in Labour's 2029 election manifesto, that would be 30 years after Sir Tony Blair launched a royal commission on social care and more than 15 years since his own commission reported back.

Social care reform could mean big risks and big rewards for Burnham

Why the PM could finally drop the triple lock pension pledge

By promising an NHS-style system for social care, Sir Andrew said the PM was implying it would be "entirely free".

In England and Northern Ireland, people with assets worth more than £23,250 - including their home - are not currently entitled to help with care costs from their council.

In Wales, social care is also means-tested.

In Scotland, state-funded personal care is offered to all adults who are assessed as needing help with tasks including eating and bathing.

However, this does not include accommodation, food and everyday living costs, which are subject to means testing.

Sir Andrew said a Scottish-style system would still leave people in residential care facing "very substantial bills", which Burnham has said he wants to avoid.

The Health Foundation has estimated a universal social care system in England, with the government funding all support, could cost around £18.5bn a year.

On Sunday, Burnham said he believed the costs would be lower than this but he has not set out how he would fund his plans.

Sir Andrew said he believed an NHS-style social care system could costs "well in excess of £18bn", although a Scottish model could cost half this figure.

He added: "I also think that there was an indication in what [Burnham] said that he's imagining something that could take many years, even many decades before it came to fruition."

Sir Andrew said he would "love to see such a scheme", where all social care is government-funded, but "the cost would become very, very large".

He added that a system where the amount people must pay towards their care is capped, "could still work well for elderly people".

Sir Andrew's own commission proposed a lifetime cap of £35,000.

The report's recommendations were accepted by the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government, led by David Cameron.

However, the implementation of the cap was delayed to 2020, with Cameron blaming pressure on the public finances, and the idea was eventually dropped by subsequent Conservative governments.

Other proposals to reform the system have also failed, with Theresa May's Conservative government scrapping plans to make people receiving care at home pay the full costs if they were worth at least £100,000, after this was branded a "dementia tax" by opponents.

Meanwhile, when he was health secretary in Gordon Brown's government, Burnham's plan for a national care service suggested this could be paid for through a compulsory contribution from people's estates after they die.

The idea was branded a "death tax" by Labour's opponents and the proposals went no further after the party lost the 2010 general election.

Sign up for our Politics Essential newsletter to keep up with the inner workings of Westminster and beyond.

Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC

1:21Why is an Orange Order march being blocked in NI? 00:01:21, play videoWhy is an Orange Order march being blocked in NI?

1:03What's next for Man City? 00:01:03, play videoWhat's next for Man City?

1:32Were the RAF Fairford arrests 'pure luck'? 00:01:32, play videoWere the RAF Fairford arrests 'pure luck'?

1:03'I saw masked men,' farmer who called 999 says. 00:01:03, play video'I saw masked men,' farmer who called 999 says

1:07Defence secretary thanks farmer who called police. 00:01:07, play videoDefence secretary thanks farmer who called police

0:54Is Burnham's leadership just about 'good vibes'? 00:00:54, play videoIs Burnham's leadership just about 'good vibes'?

1:43What is a ghost number plate? 00:01:43, play videoWhat is a ghost number plate?

0:54'I quit my job to find badly built new homes' 00:00:54, play video'I quit my job to find badly built new homes'

0:55How much is in your savings account? 00:00:55, play videoHow much is in your savings account?

1:17Save or overpay? The mortgage payer's dilemma. 00:01:17, play videoSave or overpay? The mortgage payer's dilemma

0:29Why Madonna sent Sabrina Carpenter a DM. 00:00:29, play videoWhy Madonna sent Sabrina Carpenter a DM

1:14In-car breathalysers that can stop drink drivers. 00:01:14, play videoIn-car breathalysers that can stop drink drivers

1:57What to think about when buying travel insurance. 00:01:57, play videoWhat to think about when buying travel insurance

1:11Stalemate continues as police prevent Orange Order march. 00:01:11, play videoStalemate continues as police prevent Orange Order march

1:31Highs and low of SpaceX's Starship test flights. 00:01:31, play videoHighs and low of SpaceX's Starship test flights

0:56PM proposes NHS style social care system for England. 00:00:56, play videoPM proposes NHS style social care system for England

1:13Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons. 00:01:13, play videoBuckingham Palace hosts dance lessons

1:03Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 00:01:03, play videoIs Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one?

0:55How to win an aura battle. 00:00:55, play videoHow to win an aura battle

1:30Using AI to detect fake goods online. 00:01:30, play videoUsing AI to detect fake goods online

Live. RAF Fairford suspects released on bail, head of counter-terror police says

What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe

Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

How to find your perfect pillow - according to an expert

Wayne and Coleen Rooney climb Wales' highest mountain

You need £17,000 for a first home - here's how to save it

Taylor Swift breaks record for most MTV VMAs as Madonna also wins

My hometown shows that high streets have to change or die

British chess prodigy, 11, becomes youngest woman grandmaster

The four 'what next?' scenarios for Premier League after Man City ruling

Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses?

US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter

1Lithium-ion battery caused fire that killed mum and 3 children

2UK diesel price hits all-time high, the RAC says

3Thousands of illegal ghost plates on cars revealed by new cameras

4What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe

5Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

6Felled Sycamore Gap stump has 'encouraging' growth

7Carer at home investigated by BBC struck off for threatening elderly man

8Orange Order parade dispute continues as main players hold talks

9British chess prodigy, 11, becomes youngest woman grandmaster

10Three dead, including child, in Channel crossing attempt

The story of Manchester's first racially inclusive nightclub

Behind the scenes at the oldest football club in the world

The spiritual beliefs of the Spiti Valley in the Himalayas

Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
