URL: https://www.iranintl.com/en/liveblog/202609269384

All rights reserved for Volant Media UK LimitedLatest NewsLive - Iran, Qatari mediators to discuss next steps in US talks in New York | Iran InternationalLIVE
Iran, Qatari mediators to discuss next steps in US talks in New York100%An Iranian diplomat listens to the UNGA address of President Masoud Pezeshkian in New York.Summary
Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi and Iran’s negotiating team are expected to meet Qatari mediators in New York on Monday to discuss the latest proposals and views on the current state of talks with the United States, IRNA reported.
The US dollar rose above 2.4 million rials in Iran’s open market on Monday, marking another record low.
A camp in Koya, in Iraq’s Kurdistan Region, was attacked by three drones early on Monday, Kurdistan-based website Rudaw reported, citing the region’s security agency.
British Defense Minister Wes Streeting said on Monday it would be “very unwise” to speculate about the motives of people arrested near a UK air base, when asked whether Iran was involved in the incident.
The Iranian army’s deputy coordinator said on Monday that the public and armed forces were ready to defend the country and send a clear message to its adversaries.
Iran’s ambassador to the United Nations said US President Donald Trump’s threats violated international law and the UN Charter in a letter to the UN secretary-general and the Security Council president, Iran’s state media reported on Monday.
US President Donald Trump said further military strikes against Iran before the November midterms were “possible,” while saying the war would end “very soon.”AllBREAKING NEWS1Sep 28, 2026, 17:57 GMT+1
Iran’s rial falls past 2.45 million against US dollar
The US dollar crossed 2.45 million rials in Iran’s free market on Monday, extending the rial’s sharp decline to a new record low.
The dollar opened the day at around 2.405 million rials before climbing through the session. It was trading near 2.33 million rials less than a week earlier and has more than doubled from around 1.11 million rials a year ago.Sep 28, 2026, 17:35 GMT+1
UK police probe possible foreign-state role in RAF Fairford case
UK counterterrorism police are investigating whether five men arrested near RAF Fairford may have been acting on behalf of a foreign state, senior officer Laurence Taylor said Monday.
Taylor said investigators were examining whether the suspects were proxies or individuals knowingly or unknowingly working for another country, while stressing police were keeping an open mind.
The five men were arrested after suspicious vehicles were reported near the airbase and detained on suspicion of explosives offences and preparing a terrorist act. They were released on police bail Monday under strict conditions but remain under investigation as multiple lines of inquiry continue.Sep 28, 2026, 17:03 GMT+1
Iran military chief says armed forces, allies ready for ‘devastating’ response
Iran’s armed forces and allied resistance groups will deliver a “devastating response” to any threat, Armed Forces Chief of Staff Ali Abdollahi said Monday, claiming Tehran’s regional network had grown more strategically integrated despite the killing of Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah.
Abdollahi said the United States and Israel had expected Nasrallah’s killing to cause the “resistance” front to collapse, but that calculation had failed.
He said the network had not weakened and had instead achieved what he called both overt and covert “strategic integration,” adding that Nasrallah’s path continued in Lebanon, the Palestinian territories, Yemen and Iraq.Sep 28, 2026, 17:01 GMT+1
Video: Tehran students protest compulsory hijab, repression
Students at Allameh Tabataba’i University in Tehran held a protest gathering Monday, chanting against compulsory hijab, the morality police and political repression, according to videos received by Iran International.
The students chanted, “Unemployment, exploitation; compulsory hijab for women,” and “Death to tyranny, hijab and the morality police.”
Another slogan accused authorities of preaching dialogue while confronting students with force: “Their slogan is dialogue, their guns are pointed at us.”
A separate video from the protest showed students chanting, “The streets are drenched in blood, our professors remain silent.”Sep 28, 2026, 16:06 GMT+1
Iran embassy denies involvement in suspected bomb plot near UK airbase
Iran’s embassy in London rejected any link Monday to five men arrested near RAF Fairford, a British airbase used by US bombers in strikes on Iran, after reports said investigators were examining a possible Iranian connection.
In a statement on X, the embassy said it “categorically rejects and strongly condemns the recent unfounded and malicious speculations” seeking to link Iran to the arrest of five suspects near RAF Fairford, adding that such claims would “serve no purpose other than to fuel Iranophobia propaganda in the UK.”
British counterterrorism police arrested five British nationals in their 20s after three suspicious vans were seen near RAF Fairford, where suspected explosives were later found. A source familiar with the investigation told Reuters that an Iran-linked motive was considered the most likely, while Russian sabotage and an Islamist plot were also being examined.
The five arrested subjects have been released on bail, counterterrorism police chief Assistant Commissioner Laurence Taylor said on Monday.100%Sep 28, 2026, 15:13 GMT+1
BREAKING NEWS Araghchi to meet mediators over latest US talks proposals - state media
Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi and Iran’s negotiating team are expected to meet Qatari mediators in New York on Monday to discuss the latest proposals and views on the current state of talks with the United States, IRNA reported.
The report said no representative of the US side would attend the meeting.Sep 28, 2026, 15:08 GMT+1
Iranian flights to Najaf to resume within 24 hours, Iraqi envoy says
Iranian flights to Najaf International Airport will resume within 24 hours, Iraq’s ambassador to Tehran Yasser Abdulzahra al-Hajjaj said Monday, according to Iraq’s state news agency.
Najaf is one of the main destinations for Iranian religious travelers, home to the shrine of Imam Ali and a major center of Shia pilgrimage.
Al-Hajjaj said the Iraqi government had issued no decision to halt flights with Iran, blaming the suspension instead on foreign ground-service companies that stopped providing services because of concerns over US sanctions. 
He said Baghdad was continuing efforts to restore air traffic between the two countries.Sep 28, 2026, 14:50 GMT+1
US military rejects Iran’s claim of control over Strait of Hormuz
Iran does not control the Strait of Hormuz and no longer has a navy because US forces sank it, US Central Command said Monday, rejecting an IRGC commander’s claim that Tehran has full control of the strategic waterway through its navy.
CENTCOM said thousands of ships have continued to pass through the strait and more than one billion barrels of oil have transited the waterway in recent months.Sep 28, 2026, 13:13 GMT+1
Mediators to hold separate US-Iran talks Monday or Tuesday - Reuters
Mediators are expected to hold separate talks with the United States and Iran on Monday or Tuesday over an amended version of a seven-day proposal presented by Iran, sources briefed on the negotiations told Reuters.
Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi and Qatari mediators are remaining in the United States for the discussions, an official briefed on the negotiations said.
The talks will focus on an amended version of the seven-day proposal Iran presented on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly, another source briefed on the negotiations told Reuters.Sep 28, 2026, 12:55 GMT+1
UK police say five Fairford airbase detainees are British nationals
Five men detained near a British airbase used by US forces to launch attacks on Iran are British nationals living in London, police said on Monday.
Police said investigators had developed several new lines of inquiry after examining the scene near RAF Fairford and were working to establish a possible motive.
The five men were detained near the Gloucestershire airbase, which has been used by the United States for operations against Iran.100%Police officers work on a road outside the perimeter of the RAF Fairford airbase, after police declared a major incident at the base after several men were arrested on suspicion of offences under the Explosives Act, in Fairford, Gloucestershire, Britain, September 28, 2026.Load More Updates
