URL: https://www.nbcnews.com/business/consumer/china-us-tariff-cuts-60-billion-trump-xi-rcna600214

China and U.S. agree to tariff cuts on $60 billion of goods 
 IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Skip to ContentNBC News Logo
China and U.S. agree to tariff cuts on $60 billion of goods including agriculture, household itemsChina said it planned to trim duties on a variety of U.S. agricultural goods, while the U.S. plans tariff cuts on toys, small appliances and other items.Listen to this article with a free profile00:0000:00The proposed tariff cuts could apply to as much as 30% of U.S. exports to China, according to a White House official.Saul Loeb / AFP via Getty ImagesShareAdd NBC News to GoogleSept. 28, 2026, 8:42 AM EDT / Source: ReutersBy Reuters
China and the United States have agreed to cut tariffs imposed on $60 billion worth of goods imported from each other, on an array of products ranging from U.S. corn to cosmetics, and from Chinese household appliances to toys.
Under the U.S.-China Board of Trade, both countries have each recommended $30 billion of trade in non-sensitive goods for more favourable tariff treatment, United States Trade Representative Jamieson Greer said in a statement on Sunday.
For the United States, that was “unlocking improved market access” for about 30% of U.S. exports to China, he said.
The reciprocal tariff reduction as well as an extension of a trade truce were among the key takeaways from the second summit this year between Chinese President Xi Jinping and President Donald Trump, hosted in Washington last week.
One of two lists from the White House showed that China planned to trim duties on a variety of US agricultural goods including corn, wheat, sorghum, meat, dairy, vegetable oils and meals. It did not include soybeans.
Beijing will also look to reduce levies on American fish and seafood, logs and wood products, cosmetics and medical devices.
In another list were Washington’s reciprocal tariff cuts for Chinese small appliances such as coffee makers and toasters, tableware, blankets and bed linens.
The lists also included toys, fireworks, artificial flowers, Christmas tree lamps and other holiday decorations, and children’s car seats.
China’s commerce ministry said on Monday a two-month extension of a trade truce with the United States through to Jan. 10 would provide room for both sides to evaluate their ongoing arrangement to resolve economic and trade issues, while considering how to advance on those fronts.
The extension also provides a “relatively stable and predictable policy environment” for cooperation among companies and continued active discussions.Containers at Yantian Port in Shenzhen, China on Saturday.Cheng Xin / Getty Images
Both sides will hold regular talks on potential investment opportunities and barriers, enhancing policy transparency and predictability, and responding to enterprises’ concerns, the ministry said.
Stocks fell sharply in China on Monday, with investors having few concrete details to cheer from the leaders’ summit and underlying tensions resurfacing. Technology stocks fell on a bipartisan U.S. push to ban Chinese components from data centres and the benchmark blue-chip index .CSI300 slid more than 2% to a one-year low.
China’s choice of products for tariff cuts looks designed to help Beijing meet what the White House says is a $17 billion commitment to buy agricultural goods. China has already resumed large-scale buying of American soybeans under a deal struck last year to buy 25 million metric tons annually.
Both countries will set up an agriculture working group under a trade council, which will hold its first meeting before the year ends to discuss two-way market access and regulation, the commerce ministry said.
The presidential summit also yielded an agreement for China to import 10 million metric tons of coal annually from the United States in 2027 and 2028, the White House release showed. That amount roughly equals 2% of China’s coal imports each year.
Liquefied natural gas and oil were not on the list.
“Importing U.S. coal is not only a beneficial supplement to China’s domestic coal market, but also brings stable economic income and employment to the U.S. coal industry,” the Chinese ministry said.
On artificial intelligence, both sides have agreed on a communication channel for incidents and will hold a follow-up dialogue by the end of November.
China will also examine and approve foreign financial services institutions, including those with American capital, to conduct business and open branches in China.
There will also be continued communication on increasing flights between China and the United States, the ministry statement said.ShareAdd NBC News to Google
© 2026 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoToday Logo
