URL: https://www.cnbc.com/2026/09/28/iran-war-trump-hormuz.html

RAF Fairford: Alleged bomb threat, five arrested on terror chargesSkip NavigationMarkets
LivestreamWatchlistSIGN INCreate free accountMarketsBusinessInvestingTechPolitics & PolicyVideoWatchlistInvesting ClubPROLivestreamMenu
Five arrested over alleged bomb plot at UK air base used by U.S.; Iran denies linkPublished Mon, Sep 28 20263:30 AM EDTUpdated 2 Hours AgoMike SheenSam Meredith@in/samuelmeredith@smeredith19WATCH LIVEKey Points
Five arrested after an alleged bomb threat against RAF Fairford in the west of England, which has been used for American strikes on Iranian missile sites.
Iranian Ambassador Seyed Ali Mousavi has previously said allowing U.S. bombers to launch from the Fairford base was an "important matter for our self-defense."
Talks between the U.S. and Iran appeared to end in a stalemate over the weekend. File: A United States Air Force B-52 Stratofortress strategic bomber takes off from RAF Fairford on March 19, 2026 in Fairford, England. Leon Neal | Getty Images
Counterterrorism police are investigating whether people "working on behalf of a foreign state" were behind an alleged bomb threat against a U.K. base hosting the U.S. Air Force — as Iran denied speculation it was involved.
British police arrested five men on Sunday near RAF Fairford in the west of England on suspicion of explosives and terrorism offenses. They were released on bail on Monday.
Laurence Taylor, the head of counter-terrorism policing at London's Metropolitan Police, said at a press conference that officers were investigating whether the foiled attack was the work of "proxies or individuals, either knowingly or unknowingly, working on behalf of a foreign state."
RAF Fairford has been used as the U.S. Air Force's command outpost for operations from Europe and for American strikes on Iranian missile sites.
In July, Iran's Revolutionary Guard warned any base used in airstrikes on the Islamic Republic was a legitimate target. Iranian Ambassador Seyed Ali Mousavi has previously said allowing U.S. bombers to launch from the Fairford base was an "important matter for our self-defense."
The Iranian Embassy in London said on Monday that it "categorically" rejected and "strongly condemns" speculation linking the country to the alleged plot.
In a statement posted on social media, Iran's embassy said: "The Circulation of such fabricated speculations, particularly in the aftermath of the criminal acts of aggression committed by the United States and the Israeli regime against the Iranian people, will serve no purpose other than to fuel Iranophobia propaganda in the UK."
It added: "The Islamic Republic of Iran reserves the right to take appropriate legal measures, as necessary, to safeguard the rights and interests of the country and its people in response to misleading and damaging media narratives."
Texas turning blue may hinge on Democrats harnessing data center opposition
Trump faces Xi as strains with allies complicate U.S. pressure on China
Iran's president blames U.S., Israel for global instability in defiant UN speech
Asked about the potential for Iranian involvement in the alleged plot, U.K. Defence Secretary Wes Streeting said on Monday it would be "very unwise" for him to speculate. 
U.K. Prime Minister Andy Burnham, meanwhile, described the incident as "deeply concerning" and said his government was taking "every step necessary" to protect communities and keep the country safe.
"The investigation remains ongoing, and I would urge people not to speculate while the authorities establish the full facts," Burnham said Sunday in a social media post.
Talks between the U.S. and Iran appeared to end in a stalemate, with U.S. President Donald Trump rejecting Tehran's conditional offer to reopen the Strait of Hormuz.
However, Trump told Axios in a phone interview on Sunday that he expected U.S. negotiators to engage in more talks this week.
Oil prices traded sharply higher on Monday morning. International benchmark Brent crude futures with November expiry were last seen 3.8% higher at $108.32 per barrel, while U.S. West Texas Intermediate futures rose 3.9% to $95.99.Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.Get In Touch
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inboxSign Up Now
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
© 2026 Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
 Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes.
 Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data
