URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c3v439n5xlpo

Chris Mason: Burnham looks to show he will go further than Starmer with West Bank sanctions

Image source, Getty ImagesByChris MasonPolitical editorPublished9 September 2026

There is little doubt that the UK's decision to ban imports from Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank is another significant shift in Britain's posture in the Middle East.

The announcement from the Foreign Secretary Ed Miliband, with the Prime Minister Andy Burnham alongside him in the House of Commons, comes almost exactly a year after the UK formally recognised a Palestinian state. And it comes garnished with blunt language about Israel's conduct.

This latest announcement is both a logical extension of that decision of 12 months ago, senior figures argue, but also, in words and actions, an expression of Burnham's desire to go further than his predecessor Sir Keir Starmer was willing to.

It is, Miliband believes, a re-assertion of the logic of eventually arriving at a two-state solution – a viable Palestinian state alongside Israel.

The foreign secretary passionately argued that the UK did have agency and could act – and to do nothing would amount to failure. "A strategy of passivity in the face of what is happening is not a strategy," is how Miliband put it in an interview with Jewish News, external.

There is a pride among his team that after a diplomatic effort over the summer, there is a breadth to the coordinated international action on this, with 11 other countries, including France and Canada, sharing the same approach.

"We provided a convening and coordinating role in pulling this together," one source told me, "but we didn't have to convince others to do this. They were coming to the same view themselves, so we agreed we should all go out and say this at the same time."

The hope is that coordinated action increases the likelihood that the measures will have an impact and minimises the blowback to any one country from Israel or America.

UK officials had anticipated one likely reaction from Israel would be the enforced closure of the British consulate in Jerusalem, which has indeed happened.

And while there is a weary acknowledgement that no one can be certain what President Donald Trump might say next about anything ever, it is noted in Whitehall that the initial reaction of the US Secretary of State Marco Rubio was pretty understated.

Image source, House of CommonsAs for the domestic political context, plenty in the Labour movement and the wider British left have long clamoured for this to happen.

Around 140 Labour MPs went public with this demand at the beginning of the summer, and Burnham was explicit in his criticism of his predecessor's approach to the Middle East, writing in July: "Labour's initial response to the treatment of Gaza caused huge hurt. We got it wrong and I am sorry about that."

In recent years Labour has haemorrhaged support in many communities with a significant Muslim population, and so for a new Labour prime minister seeking to lure as many on the left – and beyond – under Labour's umbrella, this diplomatic intervention makes sense.

But the reaction of the Conservative leader Kemi Badenoch, writing in the Jewish Chronicle, external, is a reminder of another challenge for Burnham, both political and societal.

"Once again, British Jews find themselves warning their own government that its relentless demonisation of the world's only Jewish state risks fanning the flames of antisemitism here at home," Badenoch said.

Later, the Chief Rabbi Sir Ephraim Mirvis said it was "truly a dark day for Britain's Jews".

Last October, as Mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham was the local figurehead during the grim reality of an attack at the Heaton Park Hebrew Congregation Synagogue in the city.

Miliband has sought to address concerns about what Badenoch calls "demonisation" by making his view clear that "holding British Jews responsible for the actions of the Israeli government is antisemitism, pure and simple".

But Labour figures are keenly aware that at points in the last decade, under the leadership of Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour Party's relationship with many British Jews was dire, a situation Starmer sought to rectify as a priority in the early years of his leadership.

In other words, the party's recent relations with many British Jews has been fragile for some time - and many in the community already felt vulnerable after last year's attack in Manchester, and the later arson attacks on Jewish community ambulances in north-west London in the spring.

Burnham has to manage that anxiety while making the case for the changing stance the government is announcing, in the weeks before he meets many of his international counterparts for the first time.

Paul Adams: British-Israeli relations at lowest ebb in decades

In West Bank, date farmers weigh impact of UK sanctions on Israeli settlers

Sign up for our Politics Essential newsletter to keep up with the inner workings of Westminster and beyond.

Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC

1:21Why is an Orange Order march being blocked in NI? 00:01:21, play videoWhy is an Orange Order march being blocked in NI?

1:03What's next for Man City? 00:01:03, play videoWhat's next for Man City?

1:32Were the RAF Fairford arrests 'pure luck'? 00:01:32, play videoWere the RAF Fairford arrests 'pure luck'?

1:03'I saw masked men,' farmer who called 999 says. 00:01:03, play video'I saw masked men,' farmer who called 999 says

1:07Defence secretary thanks farmer who called police. 00:01:07, play videoDefence secretary thanks farmer who called police

0:54Is Burnham's leadership just about 'good vibes'? 00:00:54, play videoIs Burnham's leadership just about 'good vibes'?

1:43What is a ghost number plate? 00:01:43, play videoWhat is a ghost number plate?

0:54'I quit my job to find badly built new homes' 00:00:54, play video'I quit my job to find badly built new homes'

0:55How much is in your savings account? 00:00:55, play videoHow much is in your savings account?

1:17Save or overpay? The mortgage payer's dilemma. 00:01:17, play videoSave or overpay? The mortgage payer's dilemma

0:29Why Madonna sent Sabrina Carpenter a DM. 00:00:29, play videoWhy Madonna sent Sabrina Carpenter a DM

1:14In-car breathalysers that can stop drink drivers. 00:01:14, play videoIn-car breathalysers that can stop drink drivers

1:57What to think about when buying travel insurance. 00:01:57, play videoWhat to think about when buying travel insurance

1:11Stalemate continues as police prevent Orange Order march. 00:01:11, play videoStalemate continues as police prevent Orange Order march

1:31Highs and low of SpaceX's Starship test flights. 00:01:31, play videoHighs and low of SpaceX's Starship test flights

0:56PM proposes NHS style social care system for England. 00:00:56, play videoPM proposes NHS style social care system for England

1:13Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons. 00:01:13, play videoBuckingham Palace hosts dance lessons

1:03Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 00:01:03, play videoIs Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one?

0:55How to win an aura battle. 00:00:55, play videoHow to win an aura battle

1:30Using AI to detect fake goods online. 00:01:30, play videoUsing AI to detect fake goods online

Live. RAF Fairford suspects released on bail, head of counter-terror police says

What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe

Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

How to find your perfect pillow - according to an expert

Wayne and Coleen Rooney climb Wales' highest mountain

You need £17,000 for a first home - here's how to save it

Taylor Swift breaks record for most MTV VMAs as Madonna also wins

My hometown shows that high streets have to change or die

British chess prodigy, 11, becomes youngest woman grandmaster

The four 'what next?' scenarios for Premier League after Man City ruling

Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses?

US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter

1Lithium-ion battery caused fire that killed mum and 3 children

2UK diesel price hits all-time high, the RAC says

3Thousands of illegal ghost plates on cars revealed by new cameras

4What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe

5Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

6Felled Sycamore Gap stump has 'encouraging' growth

7Carer at home investigated by BBC struck off for threatening elderly man

8Orange Order parade dispute continues as main players hold talks

9British chess prodigy, 11, becomes youngest woman grandmaster

10Three dead, including child, in Channel crossing attempt

The story of Manchester's first racially inclusive nightclub

Behind the scenes at the oldest football club in the world

The spiritual beliefs of the Spiti Valley in the Himalayas

Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
