URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c70l84ggzlgo

Who are the candidates in the Holborn and St Pancras by-election?

Image source, EPAImage caption, The Holborn and St Pancras by-election is set to take place on 8 October

The candidates have been announced who will stand in the Holborn and St Pancras by-election, which is set to take place on 8 October.

The seat became vacant after former prime minister Sir Keir Starmer announced he was standing down to focus on a role in international affairs.

Here are the people who have announced they are standing to become the area's next MP, listed in alphabetical order.

Nominations closed on Tuesday 15 September at 16:00 BST. Camden Council has since published its full list of named candidates.

Some candidates formally confirmed by the council have not yet released biographical details or campaign platforms. This article will be updated as further information and official statements become available.

Image source, LabourImage caption, Sagal Abdi-Wali has been selected as the Labour Party candidate

Camden Council leader Sagal Abdi-Wali is standing for the Labour Party.

She has led the local authority since May, having been a councillor for Camden Square since 2022.

Camden leader to stand for Keir Starmer's old seat

Barmy Brunch - Official Monster Raving Loony Party

Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, Barmy Brunch is the Official Monster Raving Loony Party candidate

Barmy Brunch, a "clown" standing as an MP in a baked bean mask, is the Official Monster Raving Loony Party candidate.

Image source, ConservativesImage caption, Ewan Cameron has been selected as the Conservative candidate

Conservative member Ewan Cameron is standing for the Conservatives.

Cameron was a councillor on Camden Council from 1998 to 2002. During that time, he was vice-chair for licensing and a lead member on the development control committee.

Tories pick ex-councillor to contest Starmer's former seat

Image source, Tom Darwood/YouTubeImage caption, Tom Darwood is an independent candidate

Tom Darwood is a former carpenter who said his family fled from Communist-controlled China in 1954.

Image source, Climate PartyImage caption, Clare Fischer is contesting the seat for the Climate Party

The Climate Party has selected Clare Fischer to stand in the October by-election.

Fischer trained as an actress before changing careers to run a music venue in Highgate for the past 20 years.

She first became involved with the party in recent weeks, but has long-held concerns over climate change.

Image source, UK ParliamentImage caption, George Galloway is standing for the Workers Party

George Galloway, leader of the Workers Party of Britain, will contest the seat for the party.

Galloway has been leader of the Workers Party since he founded it in 2019, and is a former leader of the Respect Party.

He has served as a Member of Parliament seven times for five different constituencies.

Image source, RestoreImage caption, Tyler Johnson has been selected as the Restore Britain candidate

Tyler Johnson has been selected as the Restore Britain candidate.

He is a corporate lawyer based in London.

Image source, Rejoin EU PartyImage caption, Briony Kapoor is the candidate for the Rejoin EU Party

Briony Kapoor will stand as a candidate for the Rejoin EU Party in the by-election.

Kapoor previously served two terms as an independent town councillor in Folkestone and Hythe.

Image source, Reform UKImage caption, Pete Newman has been selected as the Reform UK candidate

Pete Newman will stand as the candidate for Reform UK in the Holborn and St Pancras by-election on 8 October.

He served with the Metropolitan Police between 2004 and 2009 as a senior detective, working on crime reduction and counter-terrorism across London.

Ex-Met detective to stand for Reform in by-election

Ketankumar Pipaliya - UK VOICE safer and stronger UK

Image source, Ketankumar Pipaliya/InstagramImage caption, Ketankumar Pipaliya is the UK VOICE candidate

Ketankumar Pipaliya has run in several parliamentary constituencies for the UK VOICE party. He has been described as a pharmaceuticals entrepreneur.

Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, Zack Polanski has been selected as the Green Party candidate

Zack Polanski has been leader of the Green Party of England and Wales since September 2025 and a member of the London Assembly since May 2021.

He was the deputy leader of the Greens from 2022 to 2025.

Polanski selected as Green Party candidate for Starmer's former seat

Jonathan Silberman has previously announced runs for mayor of London and contested parliamentary elections for the Communist League.

Helen Spiby-Vann - Christian Peoples Alliance

Image source, Helen Spiby-VannImage caption, Helen Spiby-Vann will contest the seat for the Christian Peoples Alliance

The Christian Peoples Alliance has selected Helen Spiby-Vann to stand as its candidate.

Spiby-Vann is a self-employed graphic designer who lives in Finsbury Park.

Image source, Liberal DemocratsImage caption, Patrick Stillman has been selected as the Lib Dem candidate

Patrick Stillman, Lib Dem councillor for West Hampstead, is standing for the Liberal Democrats.

Stillman is also the outgoing chairman of Camden Liberal Democrats.

Lib Dem councillor to contest Starmer's seat.

Ben Walker - UK Independence Party (UKIP)

Image source, UKIPImage caption, Ben Walker is the UKIP candidate

Ben Walker is national party chairman of UKIP. The party's website says he is a Navy veteran and former county councillor, local authority vice chair and town mayor.

Listen to the best of BBC Radio London on Sounds and follow BBC London on Facebook, external, X, external and Instagram, external. Send your story ideas to hello.bbclondon@bbc.co.uk, external

What do Holborn and St Pancras voters want from their new MP?

Star Wars actor to speak about friend’s south-east London murder for first time

Council urged to support residents facing 'no fault' evictions

Housebuilders star on buyer support scheme but weak miners limit progress

Gallows Corner shops 'relieved' to see junction reopen after 'devastating' closure

The rare 'extra-special' Royal Mint 50p coin sold for 8,000 times its face value

Cruel owner busted after monkey found in bird cage inside Greenwich home

Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC

1:21Why is an Orange Order march being blocked in NI? 00:01:21, play videoWhy is an Orange Order march being blocked in NI?

1:03What's next for Man City? 00:01:03, play videoWhat's next for Man City?

1:32Were the RAF Fairford arrests 'pure luck'? 00:01:32, play videoWere the RAF Fairford arrests 'pure luck'?

1:03'I saw masked men,' farmer who called 999 says. 00:01:03, play video'I saw masked men,' farmer who called 999 says

1:07Defence secretary thanks farmer who called police. 00:01:07, play videoDefence secretary thanks farmer who called police

0:54Is Burnham's leadership just about 'good vibes'? 00:00:54, play videoIs Burnham's leadership just about 'good vibes'?

1:43What is a ghost number plate? 00:01:43, play videoWhat is a ghost number plate?

0:54'I quit my job to find badly built new homes' 00:00:54, play video'I quit my job to find badly built new homes'

0:55How much is in your savings account? 00:00:55, play videoHow much is in your savings account?

1:17Save or overpay? The mortgage payer's dilemma. 00:01:17, play videoSave or overpay? The mortgage payer's dilemma

0:29Why Madonna sent Sabrina Carpenter a DM. 00:00:29, play videoWhy Madonna sent Sabrina Carpenter a DM

1:14In-car breathalysers that can stop drink drivers. 00:01:14, play videoIn-car breathalysers that can stop drink drivers

1:57What to think about when buying travel insurance. 00:01:57, play videoWhat to think about when buying travel insurance

1:11Stalemate continues as police prevent Orange Order march. 00:01:11, play videoStalemate continues as police prevent Orange Order march

1:31Highs and low of SpaceX's Starship test flights. 00:01:31, play videoHighs and low of SpaceX's Starship test flights

0:56PM proposes NHS style social care system for England. 00:00:56, play videoPM proposes NHS style social care system for England

1:13Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons. 00:01:13, play videoBuckingham Palace hosts dance lessons

1:03Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 00:01:03, play videoIs Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one?

0:55How to win an aura battle. 00:00:55, play videoHow to win an aura battle

1:30Using AI to detect fake goods online. 00:01:30, play videoUsing AI to detect fake goods online

Live. RAF Fairford suspects released on bail, head of counter-terror police says

What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe

Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

How to find your perfect pillow - according to an expert

Wayne and Coleen Rooney climb Wales' highest mountain

You need £17,000 for a first home - here's how to save it

Taylor Swift breaks record for most MTV VMAs as Madonna also wins

My hometown shows that high streets have to change or die

British chess prodigy, 11, becomes youngest woman grandmaster

The four 'what next?' scenarios for Premier League after Man City ruling

Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses?

US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter

1Lithium-ion battery caused fire that killed mum and 3 children

2UK diesel price hits all-time high, the RAC says

3Thousands of illegal ghost plates on cars revealed by new cameras

4What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe

5Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

6Felled Sycamore Gap stump has 'encouraging' growth

7Carer at home investigated by BBC struck off for threatening elderly man

8Orange Order parade dispute continues as main players hold talks

9British chess prodigy, 11, becomes youngest woman grandmaster

10Three dead, including child, in Channel crossing attempt

The story of Manchester's first racially inclusive nightclub

Behind the scenes at the oldest football club in the world

The spiritual beliefs of the Spiti Valley in the Himalayas

Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
