URL: https://www.cnbc.com/2026/09/27/stock-market-today-live-updates.html
CNBC live blog: "Stocks fall to start the week as Treasury yields rise once again: Live updates". Updated 2026-09-28T16:38Z. Full text fetched with curl. Relevant excerpts below, verbatim.

Stocks fell Monday, weighed down by a jump Treasury yields to start the week.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 188 points, or 0.4%. The S&P 500 slid 0.5%, along with the Nasdaq Composite.
The major averages came off their lows around midday after CNN and Axios reporting, citing White House officials, that President Donald Trump was open to providing sanctions relief to Iran on nuclear matters. The reports sent crude prices well off their highs of the day.
Treasury yields, however, build on last week's sharp moves. The benchmark 10-year Treasury note yield traded above 5.2%. The 30-year bond yield topped 5.5%. Both traded around multiyear highs.
Those yields have "come back up meaningfully today, and that's causing an understandable weakness in the tape," Justin Bergner, portfolio manager at Gabelli Funds, told CNBC. "The competition for capital with AI hyperscaler spending ... also pressures the consumer with higher rates, so it kind of makes the market more one-sided than it already is."
Several AI stocks led the major indexes lower on Monday. Advanced Micro Devices and Micron Technology traded down about 5% and 4% on the day, respectively. ... Meta shed nearly 4%.
However, Nvidia bucked the trend ... The stock popped about 2% after the company announced on Monday it plans to buy back an additional $150 billion worth of its shares, bringing the total value of its share repurchasing program to $235 billion.
... The benchmark 10-year Treasury note yield scaled to a level not seen since 2007. The 30-year bond yield reach a 2004 high.
The August personal consumption expenditure price index, the Fed's preferred inflation gauge, is due out Wednesday. ... the closely watched September jobs report is set for release Friday.
U.S. President Donald Trump has suggested the White House is still considering a diesel export ban ... "We're thinking about it very seriously," Trump told a Fox News reporter on Sunday ... "That can oftentimes lead to a little bit of an increase on gasoline for cars, so we're looking at it very seriously. We may do it," he added.
Treasury yields are likely to stay elevated even if the Iran war is settled and oil prices come down, economist Mohamed El-Erian said Monday. ... "The fundamental issue I want to stress [is] that we would be having this yield discussion, even if oil prices were lower," he said on "Squawk Box." "We have an imbalance in longer-term demand for bonds and longer-term supply of bonds." ... "If [the war] gets resolved, oil prices will come down. We'll slowly get more refined products coming out," El-Erian said. "But I'm willing to bet that 10-year yields will still be around 5% We're not going back to four, four-fifty, four twenty-five, simply because there's too much of an imbalance in the supply and demand."
"In our view the recent volatility in oil prices and interest rates suggests that markets are on a path toward a new normal rather than one of heightened volatility and significant downside risk," [Oppenheimer] analyst John Stoltzfus said Monday in a note to clients.
Newmont — The gold miner fell more than 4% as prices of the precious metal declined 3%.
Airlines — Higher oil prices sent major airliners lower ... United Airlines and American Airlines slipped more than 2% each.
U.K. housebuilding stocks rocketed higher at the open, with Taylor Wimpey up 23%, Vistry Group up 20%, Bellway up 20%, Persimmon up 16% and Barratt Redrow up 14%. The sharp moves came after the Labour government, currently meeting for its annual party conference, announced a new scheme to support first time buyers in a potential boost to new-build demand.
Treasury yields were higher across the board, with the 10-year yield rising 3 basis points as the interest rate-sensitive 2-year yield climbed 4 basis points. ... The U.K.'s 2-year yield rose 5 basis points as the market monitors the political conference of the incumbent Labour Party. Germany's 2-year yield nudged up by 1 basis point.
