URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c3x2zw18ge59o

Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

Image source, PA MediaImage caption, John Healey and cabinet ministers from the other great offices of state gave speeches at Labour Party conference on Monday

The chancellor has warned against allowing Britain's benefits bill to balloon while not offering young people opportunities.

John Healey told Labour's annual conference in Liverpool that cutting welfare spending was "more than an economic must - it's a moral duty".

"The best thing we can offer a young person is not a benefit payment - it's a first job with training and a wage," he said.

He announced the expansion of a Local Apprenticeships Service for mayors in England, which he said would deliver thousands more apprenticeships for young people.

Healey's speech comes as he faces pressure to cut public spending or raise taxes ahead of next month's Budget to bring down government borrowing costs.

In an attempt to reassure the markets, he said all promises the government made would be "built on the rock of fiscal discipline" with him and Prime Minister Andy Burnham "united on meeting the fiscal rules".

Fiscal rules are the government's self-imposed constraints to manage decisions on spending and tax.

The Budget would "give families and businesses a bit of breathing space", the chancellor said.

And he admitted that "the money New Labour had in the '90s is simply not there now".

Healey blamed the Conservative Party's time in government for leaving Britain spending more on debt than on the Home Office, Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Justice combined.

Tory shadow chancellor Andrew Griffith said in response to the speech that "Labour MPs will never support cutting the out-of-control welfare bill" and "with Labour, it's always more taxes if you work and more benefits if you don't".

Healey praised young people as "digital natives, whip-smart, questioning, ambitious, brave" who could move from "generation jeopardy to generation hope".

But he pointed to the million young people not in education, employment or training - known as Neets - which he said created a necessity to make benefits a bridge into work, rather than a "trap".

"It is not progressive to allow a bigger and bigger benefits bill, and a system which offers an income but doesn't offer a future," he said.

The Local Apprenticeships Service was initially planned as a pilot in a limited number of areas but would now be available to any English mayor who wants it, he said.

Through the scheme, which the Treasury says will roll out across England from March 2027, local teams plan to match young people with employers, including small businesses that have never taken on a trainee.

The department said an extra £100m was going into the scheme, "fully funded" by savings from the Department for Work and Pensions' crackdown on fraud.

Powers to implement the scheme will rest with mayors because "they know which firms are hiring, which colleges are delivering, which estates have been left behind," Healey said.

Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, John Healey visits apprentices in January 2025, when he was defence secretary

It comes as the final instalment of a major report by former minister Alan Milburn is expected to set out recommendations for tackling the one in eight people aged 16 to 24 in the UK who are Neets in the coming weeks.

Healey said these young people had been "signed off, written off" which the Labour government would address.

Helen Miller, director of the Institute for fiscal studies think tank, told the BBC that sticking to fiscal rules alone would not be enough to reduce debt because it is "basically a promise to get down debt tomorrow".

She suggested that reducing the benefits bill, including removing support from some people, could be one way of cutting the national debt sooner.

Speaking to the BBC's Newscast, Healey said he "won't set a timeline" for the UK's benefits bill coming down before the next election, adding that reducing the number of Neets cannot be done "overnight".

Elsewhere in his speech, Healey repeated his promises to re-industrialise the country and said Rolls Royce would invest £300m more into its British factories in Derby, Bristol, Glasgow and Rotherham.

He also said he was bringing back the Union Learning Fund in England, established in 1998 and abolished by the Tories, to help working people gain more skills in an age of artificial intelligence. It was initially unclear how this would be funded.

Healey did not set out a pathway for greater defence spending in his speech, another area of pressure for ministers.

And he declined to commit to the pensions triple lock being in Labour's next manifesto, when asked several times by BBC Radio 5 Live's Matt Chorley, after speculation it may be dropped to help fund a new social care system.

Are you young and looking for a job? Share your experiences.

Want your job application to stand out? Employers say they look for these six skills

Healey to promise 'new age of industrialisation' for UK in conference speech

One in eight young people still out of work or education ahead of major review

Sign up for our Politics Essential newsletter to keep up with the inner workings of Westminster and beyond.

Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC

1:21Why is an Orange Order march being blocked in NI? 00:01:21, play videoWhy is an Orange Order march being blocked in NI?

1:03What's next for Man City? 00:01:03, play videoWhat's next for Man City?

1:32Were the RAF Fairford arrests 'pure luck'? 00:01:32, play videoWere the RAF Fairford arrests 'pure luck'?

1:03'I saw masked men,' farmer who called 999 says. 00:01:03, play video'I saw masked men,' farmer who called 999 says

1:07Defence secretary thanks farmer who called police. 00:01:07, play videoDefence secretary thanks farmer who called police

0:54Is Burnham's leadership just about 'good vibes'? 00:00:54, play videoIs Burnham's leadership just about 'good vibes'?

1:43What is a ghost number plate? 00:01:43, play videoWhat is a ghost number plate?

0:54'I quit my job to find badly built new homes' 00:00:54, play video'I quit my job to find badly built new homes'

0:55How much is in your savings account? 00:00:55, play videoHow much is in your savings account?

1:17Save or overpay? The mortgage payer's dilemma. 00:01:17, play videoSave or overpay? The mortgage payer's dilemma

0:29Why Madonna sent Sabrina Carpenter a DM. 00:00:29, play videoWhy Madonna sent Sabrina Carpenter a DM

1:14In-car breathalysers that can stop drink drivers. 00:01:14, play videoIn-car breathalysers that can stop drink drivers

1:57What to think about when buying travel insurance. 00:01:57, play videoWhat to think about when buying travel insurance

1:11Stalemate continues as police prevent Orange Order march. 00:01:11, play videoStalemate continues as police prevent Orange Order march

1:31Highs and low of SpaceX's Starship test flights. 00:01:31, play videoHighs and low of SpaceX's Starship test flights

0:56PM proposes NHS style social care system for England. 00:00:56, play videoPM proposes NHS style social care system for England

1:13Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons. 00:01:13, play videoBuckingham Palace hosts dance lessons

1:03Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 00:01:03, play videoIs Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one?

0:55How to win an aura battle. 00:00:55, play videoHow to win an aura battle

1:30Using AI to detect fake goods online. 00:01:30, play videoUsing AI to detect fake goods online

Live. RAF Fairford suspects released on bail, head of counter-terror police says

What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe

Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

How to find your perfect pillow - according to an expert

Wayne and Coleen Rooney climb Wales' highest mountain

You need £17,000 for a first home - here's how to save it

Taylor Swift breaks record for most MTV VMAs as Madonna also wins

My hometown shows that high streets have to change or die

British chess prodigy, 11, becomes youngest woman grandmaster

The four 'what next?' scenarios for Premier League after Man City ruling

Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses?

US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter

1Lithium-ion battery caused fire that killed mum and 3 children

2UK diesel price hits all-time high, the RAC says

3Thousands of illegal ghost plates on cars revealed by new cameras

4What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe

5Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

6Felled Sycamore Gap stump has 'encouraging' growth

7Carer at home investigated by BBC struck off for threatening elderly man

8Orange Order parade dispute continues as main players hold talks

9British chess prodigy, 11, becomes youngest woman grandmaster

10Three dead, including child, in Channel crossing attempt

The story of Manchester's first racially inclusive nightclub

Behind the scenes at the oldest football club in the world

The spiritual beliefs of the Spiti Valley in the Himalayas

Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
