URL: https://www.cnbc.com/2026/09/27/iran-foreign-minister-keeps-indirect-talks-with-us-open-state-media.html
CNBC — published Sun 27 September 2026, 13:30 UTC. Date confirmed from Exa explicit result metadata (published 2026-09-27T13:30:02.000Z). By Azhar Sukri. Text = search highlights (not full fetch). CNBC is an APPROVED source.

Iran foreign minister keeps indirect talks with U.S. open: state media

- Iran says reopening the Strait of Hormuz depends on the U.S. meeting Tehran's conditions, while Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi said a negotiated solution remains possible.
- Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps claimed it captured a U.S. Remus 600 unmanned underwater vehicle.
- U.S. President Donald Trump has rejected Iran's most recent proposal and told aides he views renewed U.S. bombing after the midterm elections as likely, The Wall Street Journal reported.

Iran is sticking to its position that it would only reopen the crucial Strait of Hormuz if its conditions are met, despite a rebuke from U.S. President Donald Trump, while a senior Iranian military leader stressed his country's readiness to continue fighting.

"Our conditions are clear; any progress toward the opening of the Strait of Hormuz is contingent upon the fulfillment of these conditions, and we will not back down from them," Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi said in a post on his Telegram channel translated by Google.

"During our meetings with mediators, these conditions were fully conveyed, explained, and elaborated upon, and the mediators, in turn, relayed them to the American side," he said on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly in New York.

Trump told reporters Saturday that he has rejected Iran's latest conditional proposal for reopening the Strait of Hormuz, through which about a fifth of the world's oil supplies moved before the start of the war. "They made a proposal but I rejected it."

Araghchi on Friday had proposed reopening the strait and resuming nuclear talks with the U.S. within seven days if the Trump administration accepts its conditions.

In his latest statement, Araghchi said intermediaries between the U.S. and Iran have yet to relay a formal response from Trump to Tehran. "Only a negotiated solution can break this deadlock," he said.

Tehran's conditions include a halt to what it calls U.S. "acts of aggression," an end to the naval blockade and economic warfare, and the release of Iranian assets, Iranian foreign ministry spokesman Esmaeil Baghaei said last week.

Meanwhile, the IRGC navy claimed Sunday to have captured an American underwater drone in the Strait of Hormuz.

"IRGC Navy forces successfully captured an advanced unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV) belonging to the U.S. terrorist army," the Tasnim News Agency said in a Telegram post quoting the IRGC. It described the vehicle as a Remus 600 unmanned underwater vehicle and added that it has been handed over to the force's specialists for data recovery.

"The IRGC Navy firmly declares that the Strait of Hormuz is closed [to unauthorized traffic]," it said.
