URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cjdx53edkglgo
BBC News — Exa result metadata: published 2026-09-27T23:01:47Z (i.e. 27 Sep 2026, 23:01 BST embargoed preview for Monday's speech). Article body says "31 minutes ago" relative to fetch. Confirmed via explicit Exa metadata + fetched body. FULL FETCH.

Healey to promise 'new age of industrialisation' for UK in conference speech
By Brian Wheeler, Political reporter and Iain Watson, Political correspondent

John Healey will promise "a new age of industrialisation" for the UK, when he delivers his first Labour conference speech as chancellor on Monday.

Healey will tell delegates "our coal mines are not coming back", but that Labour will remake Britain's industrial past "for the modern age" by backing advanced manufacturing.

He will also announce plans to boost Britain's shipbuilding industry, with new orders for Royal Navy floating docks and a maritime research vessel.

With just a month to go until his first Budget, the chancellor is under pressure to cut spending or raise taxes to tackle the ballooning cost of government borrowing.

But he is not expected to reveal any details about his Budget plans in his speech at Labour's annual conference in Liverpool.

Instead, he will attempt to set out a positive vision for the future of British industry, based around what he will call a "new confidence in Britain".

The former defence secretary will announce that three new floating docks at HM Royal Naval Base Clyde, at Faslane, will be built in the UK, rather than put out to international tender.

Plans for the new docks were first set out in 2023 and are expected to upgrade Faslane's facilities for the next generation of British submarines.

The docks form part of a wider £15bn upgrade programme for the Royal Navy's shipyards and are expected to come into service in the early 2030s.

First Secretary of State Louise Haigh said in a speech on Sunday that the government would also commission a new marine research vessel as part of plans for a "new era of reindustrialisation".

The chancellor is expected to announce £115m in funding for the ship, which is also set to come into service in the early 2030s.

Ahead of his speech, Healey said: "By backing British shipyards, we are not only boosting national security but also securing resilience in the industries that will drive growth today while building the capabilities the country needs for the future."

Shadow chancellor Andrew Griffith said the plans were "reheated announcements" with "no clarity on where the money is coming from".

He added: "Labour are running scared of making the tough choices needed to pay for Britain's defence.
"All they can offer is reannounced docks and more hot air from Healey. Only the Conservatives will cut the welfare bill to fund defence."

Charlotte Brumpton-Childs, national secretary of the GMB union, which has campaigned for the move, said it would be a "massive boost" for the UK's shipbuilding sector.
"For too long juicy contracts have been sent to overseas - often subsidised - yards.
"This policy could reinvigorate UK yards and the communities that depend on them," he added.
