URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c85ydnwqpzyzo
BBC News — Exa metadata: published 2026-09-27T16:20:06Z. Date confirmed from explicit Exa result metadata (bbc.co.uk is WebFetch-refused). SEARCH HIGHLIGHTS.

What we know about RAF Fairford incident and counter-terror probe

Five men have been arrested on suspicion of explosive and terrorism offences after a major incident was declared at an airbase in the west of England.

Local police said they received a call about "three suspicious vehicles" travelling towards RAF Fairford at 00:45 BST on Sunday.

Five men were later arrested by armed officers near Whelford, a Cotswold village around two miles (3.2km) south-east of the base.

A bomb disposal team was also deployed to the village to examine a number of vehicles, around which a 400m (1,312ft) cordon has been placed.

There has been large emergency service presence in the area since the early hours of Sunday, which Gloucestershire Police Assistant Chief Constable Richard Ocone said would remain "for some time".

Ocone told a news conference on Sunday afternoon that "work to establish the full nature of the incident is ongoing".

Counter Terrorism Policing are now leading the investigation. Deputy Assistant Commissioner Vicki Evans said officers were "working closely" with partners to "understand the circumstances of the incident".

The five men were initially detained on suspicion of committing offences under the Explosives Act. They were then further arrested on suspicion of preparation of a terrorist act. The men, who remain in custody, have not been named.

Eighty-five households have been evacuated and residents have been urged to shelter at a nearby leisure centre.

Gloucestershire County Councillor Paul Hodgkinson has told PA news agency there is a chance that the evacuated residents may have to stay overnight while the area around their homes is made safe.

Another man, Julian Tudsbery, said: "There were these three vans that arrived in the middle of the village and a resident reported them to the police straight away."
