URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c933kx42np4xo
BBC News — Exa metadata: published 2026-09-27T19:54:35Z. Also available at https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c933kx42np4xo with identical metadata. Date confirmed from explicit Exa result metadata. SEARCH HIGHLIGHTS.

CRITICAL FIGURE NOTE: The Merseyside Police figure for 27 September 2026 is "more than 50" ARRESTED, out of MORE THAN 250 PROTESTERS present. Do not conflate the two. Separately, the "66 arrested" figure that Exa repeatedly surfaces is from the 2025 conference (Merseyside statement of 29 September 2025, 64 held after 2 de-arrests, aged 21-83, later bailed) and MUST NOT be used for 2026.
An attempt to fetch the live Merseyside Police newsroom on the morning of 28 Sep 2026 returned a stale cached crawl dated 31/08/2026, so NO updated Monday figure, charging decision or bail outcome could be confirmed.

More than 50 Palestine Action support rally protesters arrested

More than 50 demonstrators have been arrested outside the Labour Party conference in Liverpool during a protest in support of the banned Palestine Action group, police have said.

Scores of police officers stood by before moving in to start making arrests, warning protesters they were illegally holding signs supporting a proscribed organisation.

After asking them if they were going to continue to do so, officers led some of the protesters away, telling them they had been arrested under the Terrorism Act.

Merseyside Police said more than 50 people had so far been detained at the Defend Our Juries event and that officers were in the process of making arrests on suspicion of wearing/carrying an article supporting a proscribed organisation.

In July it was confirmed that Palestine Action's proscription would be reviewed by the Supreme Court. The court said it had given the group's co-founder permission to appeal the ban, which came into force in July 2025.

The Home Office has repeatedly said that the ban of the group has nothing to do with protest in support of Palestinian causes - and was necessary because it was causing significant criminal damage to legitimate businesses.

Both the High Court and the Court of Appeal have ruled that Palestine Action's activities include criminal acts - although they were divided on whether those incidents justified turning to terrorism laws.

--- MERSEYSIDE POLICE STATEMENT, verbatim (as carried by the above and by Al Jazeera) ---
"We can confirm that more than 50 people have been arrested so far today (Sunday 27 September) at a Defend Our Juries protest near to The Wheel of Liverpool.
"Some of the people in attendance displayed material in support of Palestine Action which has been proscribed as a terrorist organisation. Officers are in the process of making arrests on suspicion of wearing/carrying an article supporting a proscribed organisation."
