URL: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/protesters-chris-bryant-northern-ireland-sinn-fein-b3057289.html
The Independent (PA copy, Rebecca Black) — dated inside article text: "Monday 28 September 2026 01:58 BST". Confirmed from byline/timestamp inside full fetch via Exa web_fetch_exa. FULL FETCH (truncated by fetch tool after O'Neill quote; search highlights appended below).

Protesters disperse after being told of 'process' to address Drumcree dispute
Rebecca Black, Monday 28 September 2026 01:58 BST

Protesters who blockaded a road in Portadown to stop a contentious loyal order parade have mostly dispersed after being told by a community leader that a fresh process to address the dispute was being initiated.

At the height of the blockade, thousands of people gathered on the Garvaghy Road throughout Sunday to prevent the Orange Order parade from nearby Drumcree Church from passing along the route.

The mass gathering, which was illegal under parading legislation in Northern Ireland, involved senior Sinn Fein politicians, including Stormont's First Minister Michelle O'Neill.

It was organised after Orangemen managed to overturn a long ban on them parading down the predominantly nationalist road.

The blockade continued through the day and late into the night, as Orangemen assembled at Drumcree Church around a mile from the road waited to commence their parade.

Around midnight, Breandan Mac Cionnaith from the Garvaghy Road Residents' Coalition, told protesters they had secured a "victory".

He said he would meet Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Chris Bryant and Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) Chief Constable Jon Boutcher on Monday morning for talks on the Drumcree parade.

Mr Mac Cionnaith said he had received "commitments" that the parade would not be proceeding down the Garvaghy Road overnight.

He asked for 20-30 volunteers to remain on the road to ensure those commitments were not broken.

"We've stopped them once. The process now is to ensure we stop them permanently," he said.

On his planned meetings on Monday, he added: "That process starts tomorrow when we go in and meet the chief constable and we'll meet the secretary of state.
"We're not going in to do deals with them, or to take half measures with them.
"We said the other day, and we said yesterday, and the day before - we're not going back, we're not turning the clock back. We're putting the clock forward."

The Northern Ireland Secretary has appealed for calm as he urged political and community leaders to reach for compromise to resolve a tense parading stand-off in Portadown.

Ms O'Neill also said the Garvaghy Road community had won a "victory".
"This community do not want this, they do not want this march," she told reporters before leaving [the area shortly after midnight on Monday morning].

--- ADDITIONAL DIRECT HIGHLIGHTS from same article (Exa search highlights, same URL) ---
Speaking to reporters in Belfast, Sir Chris [Bryant] said "nobody wants to go back 28 years".
"The whole idea of us coming here is to be able to try and be able to talk specifically face to face to some of the political leaders and some of the community leaders to see if we can get to a settled position," he said.

PSNI chief constable Mr Boutcher called for people come together to try to get past their issues. He said the police operation thus far had involved evidence-gathering of "whatever has been happening from whatever party".
"I am hoping we will bring all of today's events to a sensible and peaceful conclusion," he said.
On what a successful conclusion may look like, he added: "There has got to be a longer-term conversation which involves politicians and the people involved in what we have seen in the last 24 hours, trying to find a space that they can resolve these issues."

Earlier, Ms O'Neill told reporters on the Garvaghy Road that the reignition of the Drumcree dispute "brings into question how this whole peace process works".

Party president Mary Lou McDonald called on the Northern Ireland Secretary to intervene to ban the parade. She said the people of the Garvaghy Road would "not be drawn back to the past".
"The Secretary of State needs to intervene. The chief constable of the PSNI needs to intervene and put a stop to this," she said.

A spokesperson for the Orangemen said they would continue to wait in the church hall, adding "we demand the parade goes ahead". Their supporters relocated to Portadown town centre.

[Taoiseach Micheal] Martin also described the decision by the Parades Commission to allow a parade to go down the Garvaghy Road for the first time in nearly three decades as "incomprehensible and wrong".

Permission was granted for a parade subject to strict restrictions, including a limit of 35 participants and an 8am start time.
