URL: https://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/donald-trump-wes-streeting-keir-starmer-pete-hegseth-gloucestershire-b1298573.html
OUTLET: The Standard (Evening Standard) — BANNED SOURCE. Exa metadata: published 2026-09-27T16:32:48Z (a second URL for the same story shows 2026-09-27T15:39:48Z). Author Pol Allingham. The copy is PA (the article's second URL slug contains "press-association").
DO NOT PUBLISH FROM THIS FILE. It is cached only to record that the Wes Streeting fringe quotes exist in PA copy. Before using the Streeting quotes, find them in an approved carrier of the same PA copy (The Independent carried the adjacent PA Fairford stories at b3057087 and b3057154; the Express & Star carried this exact PA copy at https://www.expressandstar.com/uk-news/police-investigate-whether-iran-linked-to-suspected-raf-base-terror-plot-9200521, also not approved). SEARCH HIGHLIGHTS.

Defence Secretary Wes Streeting said he would not comment on a live operation but he had been in contact with Pete Hegseth, his opposite number in the US.

Speaking at a fringe event at Labour conference, he said: "I don't think it will come as a surprise to anyone that, given the importance of Fairford, not just to the United Kingdom but to the United States, we've been working closely with our American friends, and I've been in touch during the course of today with my counterpart Pete Hegseth."

Asked if there was any Iranian involvement, he said: "I'm not going to comment on the underlying motivations of those who've been arrested today, or indeed the, sort of, the genesis of their activity, I think it's far too early to comment or speculate, and it would be irresponsible for me to do so."

In March this year, after then prime minister Sir Keir Starmer granted permission for "defensive" US action against Iranian missile sites from UK bases, four American bombers landed at RAF Fairford and the US started using British bases for "specific defensive operations".

The arrests come amid heightened concerns around the threat from hostile states to the UK, with Russia and Iran among those that have used proxies to commit crimes on their behalf on British soil.
