URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cyv26e7yd89o
TITLE: What does Makerfield make of by-election and can Burnham win?
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-15T14:35:00Z
AUTHORS: James Gregory, Rumeana Jahangir

The residents of Makerfield are about to find themselves at the epicentre of the political universe as a by-election battle that could decide the next prime minister is set to take place on their doorstep.

The constituency, which is home to around 76,000 voters and made up suburbs of Wigan and former mining towns and villages, has not traditionally been a hotbed of political intrigue.

A safe Labour seat since it was created in 1983, it has recently seen Reform UK sweep the board in local council elections, like many other parts of the country.

Reform's rise is one of the factors that has led to pressure on Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer to resign.

The area's current MP, Josh Simons, has announced he is standing down to make way for Burnham.

Burnham does not have to stand down as mayor to stand in the by-election and will only resign from that position if he wins and becomes an MP again.

The earliest a by-election could be held is on Thursday, 18 June - during the same week that Sir Keir is due to be at a G7 summit in France.

Before Burnham can run, he will need to be chosen as Labour's candidate by officers on the party's National Executive Committee (NEC). The body previously blocked Burnham from standing in the Gorton and Denton by-election in February, but the BBC understands that the prime minister will not seek to block him this time around.

Burnham was re-elected for a second term as Greater Manchester mayor in May 2021 and a third in May 2024, with 63.4% of the vote - in Wigan, he received 66% of the vote.

Polling expert Sir John Curtice told Politico Labour would have "less than 5% chance" in the Makerfield by-election "if it were anyone other than Andy Burnham" as a candidate. He added: "If [Burnham] manages to win this, he will certainly be demonstrating his ability to win constituencies you would expect most Labour politicians to lose at the moment."

Outgoing MP Josh Simons told the BBC that he was confident Burnham could win the seat, but admitted there was a "really tough fight" on his hands.

At the general election in 2024, Simons won the seat with 45.2% of the vote, a majority of 5,399. Reform came in second with 31.8% of the vote, with the Conservatives in third, Lib Dems in fourth and Greens in fifth.

This seat is 29th on Reform's target list and the party needs a swing of just over 6.7% to win it.

Roughly, Reform pulled in 50% of the vote share in the local elections, with Labour at 27%, the Greens at 10%, Conservatives at 7% and Lib Dems at 4%. Reform gained 24 seats on Wigan Council, including in two wards in Ashton-in-Makerfield.

Richard Tice, Reform UK's deputy leader, said the party was aiming to "make Burnham history" and would be "throwing everything possible" at ensuring a "seismic" win in this by-election.

Meanwhile the Green Party has said it has started the selection process for its candidate. The party won February's by-election in Gorton and Denton and made big gains in Manchester in last week's local elections. But the party has downplayed its prospects in Makerfield.
