URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/china/trump-says-he-chinas-xi-agree-iran-cannot-have-nuclear-weapons-2026-05-15/
TITLE: Trump says he is losing patience with Iran, did not ask China for any favours
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-15T06:18Z (updated 14:32Z)
AUTHORS: Trevor Hunnicutt, Jana Choukeir (Reuters)

ABOARD AIR FORCE ONE/DUBAI — U.S. President Donald Trump said his patience with Iran was running out and that Chinese President Xi Jinping had agreed that Tehran must reopen the Strait of Hormuz, but China gave no indication it would weigh in.

As he flew back from Beijing on Friday after two days of talks with Xi, Trump said he was considering whether to lift U.S. sanctions on Chinese oil companies buying Iranian oil. China is the biggest buyer of Iranian oil.

"I'm not asking for any favors because, when you ask for favors, you have to do favors in return," Trump said, when asked by a reporter on his plane home whether Xi had made any firm commitment to put pressure on the Iranians to reopen the strait.

"We've wiped out their (Iran's) armed forces, essentially. We may have to do a little cleanup work."

China's foreign ministry issued a blunt statement: "This conflict, which should never have happened, has no reason to continue."

Iran effectively shut the strait to most shipping in response to U.S.-Israeli attacks that began on February 28, causing an unprecedented disruption to global energy supplies.

"We don't want them to have a nuclear weapon, we want the straits open," Trump said in Beijing, sitting alongside Xi.

Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araqchi said Tehran had received messages from the U.S. indicating Washington was willing to continue talks. "We hope that, with the advancement of negotiations, we will reach a good conclusion so that the Strait of Hormuz can be completely secured and we can expedite the normalisation of traffic through the strait," he told reporters in New Delhi.

"I am not going to be much more patient. They should make a deal," Trump said in an interview aired on Thursday night on Fox News' "Hannity" program, suggesting the enriched uranium only needed to be secured by the U.S. for "public relations" rather than practical necessity.

Oil prices rose around 2% to around $108 a barrel on concerns over a lack of progress in resolving the conflict. U.S. Treasury yields hit their highest in around a year as traders anticipated the Federal Reserve may need to hike rates to rein in inflationary pressures from the blockade.

Trump said Xi also promised not to send Iran military equipment. "That's a big statement," Trump said on "Hannity".

Asked about U.S. sanctions on Chinese oil refineries buying Iranian oil, he told reporters on his plane: "We talked about that and I'm going to make a decision over the next few days."
