URL: https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/oil-tankers-transiting-strait-hormuz-since-start-iran-war-2026-05-15/
TITLE: Oil tankers transiting Strait of Hormuz since start of Iran war
PUBLISHED: 2026-04-14 (updated 2026-05-15T07:26Z)
AUTHORS: Ruth Chai, Florence Tan (Reuters)

The U.S. has maintained a blockade of Iranian ports, while Iran lifted and then reimposed its own blockade on marine traffic passing through the Strait of Hormuz, which typically handles roughly one-fifth of the world's oil supply.

Non-Iranian oil tankers that have passed through the strait since the start of the U.S.-Israeli war on Iran on February 28, by cargo destination:

JAPAN: VLCC Eneos Endeavor, managed by Japanese refining group Eneos and carrying 1.2 million barrels of Kuwait crude and 700,000 barrels of Emirati Das Blend oil, exited the strait as of May 14. The tanker loaded in late February and is expected to arrive in Japan on June 3, according to Kpler. The first VLCC to exit, the Idemitsu Maru carrying 2 million barrels of Saudi Arabian oil, will arrive at Nagoya in Japan on May 25.

UAE: VLCC Basrah Energy loaded 2 million barrels of Upper Zakum crude from ADNOC's Zirku terminal on May 1 and exited the Strait of Hormuz on May 6. In April, ADNOC managed to export at least 4 million barrels of Upper Zakum crude and 2 million barrels of Das crude on four tankers from terminals inside the Gulf.

CHINA: VLCC Yuan Hua Hu, carrying 2 million barrels of Iraqi crude, is expected to arrive at eastern China's Zhoushan port on June 1, after it exited the strait on May 13. Hong Kong-flagged Cospearl Lake, laden with almost 1.9 million barrels of Iraqi oil, discharged its cargo on May 2 at Ningbo. Both VLCCs are chartered by Unipec, the trading arm of Chinese energy giant Sinopec.

INDIA: At least two VLCCs and two suezmax tankers exited the Gulf in March and April to offload crude in India. VLCC Habrut crossed the strait on April 2, discharged Abu Dhabi crude for Indian Oil Corp at Paradip on April 20.

THAILAND: A Thai oil tanker owned by Bangchak Corp safely passed through the Strait of Hormuz following diplomatic coordination between Thailand and Iran, and was not required to pay to escape the blockade, a Thai official said on March 25.
