URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/lebanon-press-israel-cease-fire-washington-talks-lebanese-official-says-2026-05-14/
TITLE: US casts Israel-Lebanon talks on Thursday as 'positive and productive'
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-14T10:06Z (updated 2026-05-14T22:51Z)
AUTHORS: Laila Bassam, Steven Scheer, Kanishka Singh

WASHINGTON/BEIRUT/JERUSALEM (Reuters) — The United States cast Israel-Lebanon talks held in Washington on Thursday as "productive and positive" and a State Department official said more discussions aimed at ending their conflict will continue on Friday.

A senior Lebanese official said earlier that Lebanon will demand that U.S. ally Israel cease fire in the face-to-face talks, as Israel and Iran-backed Hezbollah continued to trade blows despite a U.S.-backed truce declared last month. An Israeli government spokesperson said the talks were taking place with the goal of disarming Hezbollah and reaching a peace agreement.

A State Department official said a meeting of Lebanese and Israeli envoys, along with U.S. officials, started at about 9 a.m. EDT (1300 GMT) and ended eight hours later. The U.S. official said there was a "full day of productive and positive talks" on Thursday that will continue on Friday.

The talks are the sides' third meeting since Israel intensified air attacks on Lebanon after Hezbollah fired missiles at Israel on March 2, three days into the U.S.-Israeli war on Iran. Israel had widened its ground invasion into Lebanon's south last month.

The fragile ceasefire is due to expire on Sunday.

With Lebanon's health ministry reporting 22 people killed in Israeli strikes on Wednesday, including eight children, the senior Lebanese official said the Lebanese delegation would seek "a ceasefire that Israel implements".

Lebanese Presidential Special Envoy Simon Karam and Israel's Deputy National Security Adviser Yossi Draznin were participants in the talks, as well as senior Israeli military representatives, a State Department official said.

Lebanese President Joseph Aoun has previously said the timing was not right for a meeting with Netanyahu, and that Lebanon must first secure "a security agreement and a halt to the Israeli attacks, before we raise the issue of a meeting between us".

Lebanese Prime Minister Nawaf Salam, in a May 10 interview with the pan-Arab broadcaster Al Arabiya, said Lebanon's principles in negotiations were shoring up the ceasefire, securing a timetable for Israeli withdrawal, and winning the release of Lebanese prisoners held by Israel.

The Lebanese health ministry says Israeli attacks have killed 2,896 people in Lebanon since March 2, including 589 women, children and medics. Some 1.2 million people have been driven from their homes in Lebanon, many of them fleeing from the south. Israel says 17 of its soldiers have been killed in southern Lebanon, along with two civilians in northern Israel.
