URL: https://www.timesofisrael.com/soldier-killed-by-hezbollah-mortar-shell-in-south-lebanon-rocket-fired-at-north/
TITLE: Soldier killed by Hezbollah mortar shell in south Lebanon; rockets fired at north
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-15 (newsroom)
SECTION: Israel & the Region

An Israeli soldier was killed Thursday night by Hezbollah mortar fire in southern Lebanon, the military announced Friday morning, as both sides continued to exchange blows despite talks in Washington on Thursday aimed at ending the conflict.

The slain soldier was named as Staff Sgt. Negev Dagan, 20, of the Golani Brigade's 12th Battalion, from the southern agricultural community of Dekel. Dagan was hit by a mortar shell fired by Hezbollah troops in southern Lebanon at around 10 p.m. on Thursday. His death was declared at the scene.

He is the 19th Israeli soldier killed since Hezbollah dragged Lebanon into the wider regional war on March 2, and the sixth since US President Donald Trump announced a truce in Lebanon on April 16. A Defense Ministry civilian contractor has also been killed in southern Lebanon in the renewed conflict with Hezbollah.

Two civilians have been killed in Hezbollah attacks on northern Israel, and an Israeli civilian was mistakenly killed in the north by Israeli artillery shelling.

The IDF and Hezbollah continued exchanging blows Thursday evening into Friday, with Israel issuing new evacuation orders in southern Lebanon on Friday morning ahead of fresh strikes, after the Iran-backed terror group fired a rocket at northern Israel.

The military said it was also installing sheets of mesh nets to guard against the threat of Hezbollah's explosive drones, which on Thursday wounded four civilians, one of them critically, in northern Israel's Rosh Hanikra area.

The IDF on Friday morning issued an "urgent" evacuation warning for several Lebanese villages on the outskirts of Tyre in southern Lebanon, ahead of strikes on Hezbollah. "In light of the Hezbollah terror organization's violations of the ceasefire agreement, the IDF is forced to act against it with force and does not intend to harm you," said army spokesman Col. Avichay Adraee.

The warning came shortly after the military said it intercepted a rocket launched by Hezbollah at the Lower Galilee. The rocket triggered sirens in the communities of Masad and Eilabun. No injuries were reported. The rocket fire was a "blatant violation of the ceasefire understandings by the Hezbollah terror organization," the IDF said.

Meanwhile, the IDF said Thursday that over 20 Hezbollah operatives had been killed in Israeli airstrikes in southern Lebanon over the past day. The IDF also said it struck some 65 Hezbollah infrastructure sites over the previous 24 hours, including weapon depots, surveillance posts, command centers, and other sites used by the terror group to advance attacks.

The military said it has so far been supplied with 158,000 square meters (nearly 189,000 square yards) of mesh netting — the equivalent of some 20 soccer fields — to counter Hezbollah's first-person view (FPV) drones. The IDF is working to procure another 188,000 square meters.

The Washington meetings mark the highest-level direct contact in decades between Lebanon and Israel, which have technically been at war since Israel was founded in 1948. A US State Department official said it was a "full day of productive and positive talks" and that discussions would continue on Friday.
