URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c5rmy70kmwdno
HTTP:200
datePublished:2026-10-10T15:16:13.343Z
dateModified:2026-10-10T15:16:13.343Z
headline:Drumcree: Judge says legal appeal on parade ban not an 'emergency'

Judge says legal appeal on Drumcree parade ban not an 'emergency' case

The Parades Commission said last month that the march by Orangemen in Portadown could go ahead on 27 September with restrictions in place after its original decision to stop the march was overturned in court

Orangemen walk down a road, behind them is a police presence

A High Court judge says a legal appeal by Orangemen following the secretary of state's decision to ban the Drumcree parade is not an emergency case.

Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Chris Bryant banned the contentious Orange Order parade at Drumcree on Friday saying the decision \"was in the best interests of peace\".

Orangemen in Portadown went to the High Court on Saturday afternoon to seek a judicial review of that decision.

Sir Chris Bryant said he received advice from the PSNI chief constable that allowing the procession to go ahead could lead to serious injury, disorder and wider unrest.

What is the Garvaghy Road dispute all about?

Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Chris Bryant banned the parade on Friday saying the decision \"was in the best interests of peace\"

The decision by Sir Chris came after an agreement could not be reached between the Portadown District Lodge and the Garvaghy Road residents over whether the march would be allowed down the predominantly nationalist road.

In response, Orangemen in Portadown lodged an application for leave for a judicial review to appeal the decision.

Lady Justice McBride told the court on Saturday: \"This is an important case, and I do believe there is some urgency, but it's not an emergency.\"

The judge also questioned the need for the case to proceed outside normal court hours.

\"I can't fully understand why this case needs to be heard today in terms of (any) irredeemable prejudice,\" she stated.

\"They (the Orange Order) had the right to walk but they couldn't exercise it, now the right has been taken away.

\"In practical terms they are in exactly the same position.\"

She told the court the information she received on the matter was very basic and there was information that was outstanding that needed to be included.

\"There is probably a lot more material that needs to be considered in this challenge, that is not before me today,\" she added.

The judge said if the secretary of state acted lawfully that decision will stand but added \"there are a lot of interwoven moving parts\".

Lady Justice McBride said she wanted to \"thank everyone for their time\", but wanted to reiterate to counsel, that they are left in no doubt \"the case had to be a matter of life and death, when brought on a Saturday afternoon\".

She adjourned the case until Monday for a full hearing.

Read more about Houthi attacks on Riyadh airport.

More on the exhibition curated by Edward Enninful.

Read our article, which includes what a dating and relationship coach thinks.

Watch Question Time on BBC iPlayer.

Catch up with the by-election on our live page.

Manchester City manager Enzo Maresca says he 'completely trusts his club' as he spoke for the first time since City were found guilty of breaching Premier League financial rules.

READ MORE: From doomscrolling to defiance - how do Man City fans feel?

Read about the latest strikes in Ukraine.