URL: https://www.iranintl.com/en/202610106673
HTTP:200
datePublished:2026-10-10T02:11:19.046Z
dateModified:2026-10-10T02:40:26Z
headline:Bessent outlines US plan to cut off Iran’s remaining economic lifelines

Bessent has pointed to Iran’s oil exports and the rial’s record lows as evidence the campaign is taking effect. On Monday, he said Iran had loaded no crude oil onto tankers in September.

A day later, he used the issue to question the appointment of Hamid Bovard as Iran’s acting oil minister, asking what he would oversee when, according to Bessent, Iran had not loaded crude onto a vessel since August 25.

The campaign has meanwhile expanded beyond seaborne oil exports. Speaking to Newsmax on Thursday, Bessent described the United Arab Emirates and Oman as partners in the effort and said Washington was working with Pakistan and Turkey to cut off Iran’s overland routes.

“We did have a maximum pressure campaign. Now we have an absolute isolation campaign and it’s working,” Bessent said.

That effort also extends to cryptocurrency. Bessent said the United States would “probably” seize about $1 billion in Iran-linked digital assets this week.

“We’re probably gonna seize a billion dollars of crypto this week,” he said. “We know where it is and we are isolating them.”Closing Iran’s remaining economic routes

The widening campaign was reflected in a new round of Treasury sanctions Thursday targeting 17 vessels and their owners in what Washington describes as Iran’s remaining shadow fleet.

Treasury said the vessels had transported millions of barrels of Iranian crude oil, petroleum products and petrochemicals to markets in South and East Asia. It said the action effectively neutralized the vast majority of Iran’s remaining shadow fleet network.

The measures are the latest action under Operation Economic Outcast, launched on August 24 and dubbed Economic D-Day. The campaign initially increased sanctions exposure across Iran’s digital asset, technology, gold, aviation and shipping sectors before Washington widened it on October 1 to the automotive and rail industries.

Bessent has portrayed the effort as targeting not only Iran’s sources of revenue but also the ability of Iranian officials to access wealth and services abroad.

“They can’t go see their plastic surgeon in London, their girlfriend in Paris, and their money in Geneva,” he told Newsmax.

The campaign has coincided with a sharp decline in Iran’s currency, which traded near 2.7 million rials to the dollar this week despite efforts by the central bank to support it.

Bessent has said the ultimate objective is to force Tehran to choose between reintegration into the global economy and what he called “complete global isolation and a subsistence economy.”
