URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmx28pd23pn5o
HTTP:200
datePublished:2026-10-10T10:50:41.120Z
dateModified:2026-10-10T11:21:14.286Z
headline:Rail disruption in Staffordshire due to overhead line fault

Rail disruption after overhead line fault

There are problems on the West Coast Main Line in Staffordshire

A photo showing the backs of two men in orange hi-viz jackets which say Network Rail on the back of them. They also wear white hard hats. In the background, two men are in a cherry picker.

Rail passengers are being urged to check before they travel due to overhead line problems on the West Coast Main Line in Staffordshire.

Work was ongoing to fix a fault with the 25,000-volt wires which power trains near Penkridge, causing disruption between Stafford and Wolverhampton.

At 12:00 BST, National Rail confirmed that lines have reopened between Stafford and Birmingham New Street, but residual disruption can still be expected until 16:00 BST on Saturday.

Adam Checkley from Network Rail, said: \"Our teams have now cleared the issue allowing the route to reopen, but with trains and their crew out of position, delays and cancellations will continue throughout the day.\"

Rail replacement buses are in place at Birmingham, Stafford and Wolverhampton.

Checkley added: \"We're sorry to passengers impacted by the overhead line problems at Four Ashes near Penkridge.

\"With disruption to train services likely throughout the day, I'd urge people to check National Rail Enquiries before they set off on their journey.\"

Ticket acceptance is in place on alternative routes including the East Coast Main Line, and Midland Main Line via Sheffield.

Tell us which stories we should cover in Wolverhampton

Follow BBC Wolverhampton & Black Country on BBC Sounds, Facebook, X and Instagram.

Read more about Houthi attacks on Riyadh airport.

More on the exhibition curated by Edward Enninful.

Read our article, which includes what a dating and relationship coach thinks.

Watch Question Time on BBC iPlayer.

Catch up with the by-election on our live page.

Manchester City manager Enzo Maresca says he 'completely trusts his club' as he spoke for the first time since City were found guilty of breaching Premier League financial rules.

READ MORE: From doomscrolling to defiance - how do Man City fans feel?

Read about the latest strikes in Ukraine.