URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c699zyyyn4y0o
HTTP:200
datePublished:2026-10-09T16:59:17.324Z
dateModified:2026-10-09T20:11:36.093Z
headline:Early release scheme prisoner jailed days after leaving

Early release scheme prisoner jailed days after leaving

Michael Bogle spoke to reporters outside prison when he was released on 1 October

Close-up of Michael Bogle wearing black-rimmed glasses, a grey crewneck jumper, and a black cross-body bag strap, standing outside the stone entrance of a prison building.

A man has been jailed for a number of shoplifting offences days after being freed under the government's early release scheme.

Michael Bogle, 38, was released from HMP Wandsworth on 1 October as part of the first wave of prisoners to be let out under the plan.

Speaking to reporters outside the prison following his release, Bogle said the conditions inside were \"awful\" and said \"people like me\" should not be in prison \"for a long time\".

In the four days after his release, Bogle stole more than £100 worth of detergent from supermarkets in north London.

He was arrested on Tuesday and admitted the offences in court on Wednesday, resulting in an eight-month sentence.

The previous 32-week sentence he was released from early had been suspended but he was jailed for breaching its terms. He served 78 days.

Asked if he had a message for Prime Minister Andy Burnham after his early release, Bogle said: \"Keep the early release going. It's good.\"

The scheme was brought in to relieve pressure on prisons across England and Wales which were dangerously close to reaching full capacity.

It is understood the force's highest ranking commander in north-west London referred to his case in a letter raising concerns about the early releases.

Det Ch Supt Luke Williams outlined the details of the \"astonishing\" case in correspondence to local politicians, which was later shared by Shadow Home Secretary Chris Philp.

Without naming Bogle, the letter, sent on Wednesday, said he had been identified as a high-risk offender by the probation service but was released on 1 October.

\"Just one day after his release\" he was recorded on CCTV stealing, Williams said.

Following reports from supermarket staff that the offending continued over the following days, neighbourhood officers \"spent an entire day\" locating the man and bringing him into custody, the letter said.

Williams said: \"While I am sure it is not surprising that someone with this history went on to reoffend, the speed with which he did so, and the impact on front-line policing, is astonishing.\"

Borough commander Det Ch Supt Luke Williams said early releases put pressure on policing

\"The concerning nature of the Early Release Scheme in this case was a known prolific offender being put back into the community, only to immediately reoffend,\" Williams said.

\"Not only does this place communities at risk but puts demand straight back into policing who must arrest, investigate and put the individual into custody.\"

He said this case required 27 officer hours to investigate at a cost of £1,887.

Williams told the MPs and councillors that the Met \"fully recognises that the government is dealing with significant pressures\" in the prison system but that those pressures are being \"transferred on to policing with no recognition\".

He said the case was \"not just a localised issue\", but one being seen by Met officers across the capital.

A Ministry of Justice spokesperson said: \"We inherited a prison system on the brink of collapse. If we had failed to act, the police would have been forced to halt arrests, putting communities at untold risk.

\"We will never jeopardise public safety. That is why we are putting thousands more Neighbourhood Police officers on to our streets, upping police funding to £18.5bn and taking investment in the probation service to record levels.\"

They added that offenders released early on licence faced the \"toughest-ever controls\", including exclusion zones and the expansion of electronic tagging.

Listen to the best of BBC Radio London on Sounds and follow BBC London on Facebook, X and Instagram. Send your story ideas to hello.bbclondon@bbc.co.uk

Read more about Houthi attacks on Riyadh airport.

More on the exhibition curated by Edward Enninful.

Read our article, which includes what a dating and relationship coach thinks.

Watch Question Time on BBC iPlayer.

Catch up with the by-election on our live page.

Manchester City manager Enzo Maresca says he 'completely trusts his club' as he spoke for the first time since City were found guilty of breaching Premier League financial rules.

READ MORE: From doomscrolling to defiance - how do Man City fans feel?

Read about the latest strikes in Ukraine.