URL: https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-trump-us-elections-saudi-arabia-yemen-houthis/
HTTP:200
datePublished:2026-10-09T07:09:00-0400
dateModified:2026-10-10T12:43:22-0400
headline:Live Updates: Putin relays Iran's position on peace deal to President Trump

Updated on:  October 10, 2026 / 12:43 PM EDT
            / CBS News

The U.S. is warning all citizens to avoid King Khalid International Airport in Riyadh in the wake of new attacks on the location Saturday, the embassy said.

"The U.S. Mission is aware of attacks on King Khalid International Airport in Riyadh on October 10 and strongly recommends all U.S. citizens avoid this airport and surrounding areas," the U.S. Embassy in Saudi Arabia said on X. "U.S. government employees working in Saudi Arabia require special authorization to use the King Khalid International Airport in Riyadh. U.S. citizens should be aware of potential flight cancellations, airspace closures, and travel disruptions."

While the airport nor the Iran-backed Houthis have confirmed an attack, there were widespread reports of an explosion at the main airport in Saudi's capital and reports of injuries.

The Houthis have attacked the airport, which is hundreds of miles north of the Yemen border, several times this week. Four people have been killed in Houthi attacks on the airport, including three people on Thursday. One of those killed was a pilot for Saudia airline.

The Canadian, German and Spanish embassies in Saudi Arabia on Saturday warned their citizens to avoid Riyadh's international airport after reports it was attacked.

Spain's embassy, in a message on X, alerted nationals to a "new attack" by Yemen's Iran-backed Houthis on the airport, where witnesses earlier told AFP an evacuation was ordered.

A diplomatic source separately told AFP that the Houthis had hit the airport with a missile around 3 p.m. local time.

Canada's embassy said only that unspecified "ongoing military activity" was affecting Riyadh's international airport, while Germany's mission alluded only to "the current situation."

France's embassy on Friday urged French nationals to take "utmost care" in Saudi Arabia because of "strikes in recent days by the Houthis." It also warned French citizens not to record images of zones that were hit, nor share any online.

Saudi Arabia has been tightly controlling public information about Houthi attacks on its soil in recent weeks, leaving media and residents unclear as to the danger.

The airport in the Saudi capital was attacked again Saturday and was evacuated, two regional officials said, two days after three Saudi citizens including a pilot were killed there as the kingdom faces an extraordinary series of assaults in the new front in the Iran war.

One official said air traffic to the Riyadh airport had stopped. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they weren't authorized to speak to the media.

King Khalid International Airport has been targeted multiple times in the week since a Saudi-led coalition launched a major military offensive against Iran-backed Houthi rebels in neighboring Yemen. The Houthis claimed responsibility for the earlier attacks, including one Wednesday that killed a Sudanese national.

There was no immediate Houthi statement Saturday. The Saudi government-run Center for International Communication, which oversees foreign media in the kingdom, didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.

A Riyadh resident, Ahmed Sayed, told The Associated Press he heard at least two loud explosions that rocked the capital.

The airport issued a terse alert telling passengers to check their flight status with airlines before heading to the airport.

People were being evacuated from Riyadh's international airport on Saturday, witnesses told AFP, raising fears of a fresh attack after strikes claimed by Yemen's Houthis killed three people there this week.

Saudi authorities did not confirm any new attack or evacuation, but one witness reported hearing an explosion while waiting to board a flight, and at least one person was injured in an unspecified incident at the airport, a relative told AFP.

The relative said the person suffered injuries to their shoulders and arms from shattered glass and was being taken to hospital.

Two other witnesses confirmed people were being evacuated, but did not know what triggered it.

The airport was hit by deadly attacks claimed by Yemen's Houthis on Thursday, though the Iran-backed group did not announce any fresh strikes on the facility on Saturday.

Yemeni military sources told AFP on Saturday their forces were advancing against the Iran-backed Houthis in areas around the Bab el-Mandeb Strait but have not yet secured control of the waterway, after the government launched an operation to capture lost territory.

The Saudi-backed government last week announced a counteroffensive aimed at retaking all areas held by the Houthis, after the pro-Iran group seized Yemen's entire western coastline in a lightning offensive.

The Houthis confirmed government forces attacked in the Bab el-Mandeb area but they claimed to have repelled the assault.

"Saudi-led forces attempted to advance from the Ras al-Ara area in Lahj governorate towards the area south of Bab al-Mandab," Hizam al-Asad, a member of the Houthis' political bureau, told AFP.

"However, our forces repelled them outside the Bab el-Mandeb zone, inflicting heavy losses in personnel and equipment and forcing the survivors to retreat.

"Our forces maintain control over Bab el-Mandeb, Mayun Island, and the remaining areas along the country's western coast," he said.

Sources from the military of Yemen's internationally recognised government also said Mayun Island — located in the heart of the strait — remained in Houthi hands as fighting continued.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has told Donald Trump about Iran's position on a possible Mideast peace deal, the Kremlin said Saturday.

The Kremlin said Tehran's stance was relayed in a phone call held between the two leaders on Friday. It did not say how Trump responded, nor elaborate on Iran's position.

Diplomatic efforts to end the Iran conflict, which began with U.S.-Israeli strikes on Iran in February, have been at an impasse since the summer.

Putin met Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian on the sidelines of a summit in Turkmenistan earlier this week, where the Russian leader expressed an interest in helping broker peace.

"In coordination with the Iranian president, Putin conveyed the Iranian side's views on a possible resolution to the conflict to Trump," Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Saturday, according to Russia's state RIA news agency.

During a rally in upstate New York, President Trump said, "Iran will be very quick, one way or the other. Either they give us everything, or they don't exist any longer. They know that"

The president made the comments while criticizing the Nobel Peace Prize committee for not awarding him the prize — a frequent complaint by Mr. Trump. Calling the body "crooked," Mr. Trump attacked it for giving the prize to former International Criminal Court Judge Navanethem Pillay, whom the president called a "mystery person."

"This is an indelible stain on the country of Norway and those people that made such a disgraceful and embarrassing decision," he said. "The Nobel Peace Prize has been forever discredited by a handful of radical ideologues who are anti-democracy and really enemies of civilization."

The Saudi-led coalition fighting Yemen's Houthis said Saturday it destroyed more than 100 military targets in a "large-scale operation" against the Iran-backed group.

"We are carrying out a large-scale operation targeting the personnel and capabilities of the Houthi terrorist militia," Turki al-Maliki, spokesperson for the Saudi coalition, wrote on X.

"We destroyed 136 military targets in areas controlled by the Houthi terrorist militia," he said in a separate post.

The Houthi's Almasirah TV channel reported that Saudi missiles targeted areas in the northwestern Yemeni governorate of Saada.

The conflict between the Houthis and Yemen's internationally recognized government — which Saudi Arabia supports — reignited in July, and has since spilled over into the neighboring kingdom.

In addition to seizing territory along the Red Sea coast in Yemen, the Houthis have attacked transport hubs, oil facilities and other civilian targets in the world's largest crude exporter with drones and missiles.

President Trump said Russia has agreed to provide the world with millions of tons of diesel fuel over the next several months in a bid to decrease skyrocketing global prices.

In a Truth Social post, the president said he had just gotten off the phone with Russian President Vladimir Putin, who had agreed to release 300,000 tons of diesel immediately. He said another 500,000 tons of diesel would be released in November, followed by 1 million tons in December.

"Additionally, based on the condition of their Diesel Refineries, Russia will then deliver, within a short period of time, 3,000,000 Tons of Diesel Fuel," Mr. Trump continued.

The Treasury Department also announced Friday that it would temporarily waive sanctions on Russia's energy sector to "allow the supply of Russian diesel to the global market."

Mr. Trump had earlier Friday teased a "big announcement coming up on diesel" during remarks at a Columbus Day celebration.

Diesel prices have skyrocketed in recent months amid the war with Iran. The average price of a gallon of diesel is $6.28, according to AAA, which is up from $5.94 a month ago and $3.68 a year ago.

President Trump teased a "big announcement coming up on diesel" during remarks Friday at a Columbus Day celebration, but offered little information to speculate on what the announcement would be about.