https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-minister-to-hand-regions-innovation-funding-to-build-world-leading-industries
HTTP:200
datePublished:2026-10-09T17:21:18+01:00
dateModified:2026-10-09T17:21:18+01:00
headline:None

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Navigation menu
      


      
                    Menu

        
          Menu
      
      
        


            
              
                Services and information
              
              
                    
                      Benefits
                      
                    
                    
                      Births, death, marriages and care
                      
                    
                    
                      Business and self-employed
                      
                    
                    
                      Childcare and parenting
                      
                    
                    
                      Citizenship and living in the UK
                      
                    
                    
                      Crime, justice and the law
                      
                    
                    
                      Disabled people
                      
                    
                    
                      Driving and transport
                      
                    
                    
                      Education and learning
                      
                    
                    
                      Employing people
                      
                    
                    
                      Environment and countryside
                      
                    
                    
                      Housing and local services
                      
                    
                    
                      Money and tax
                      
                    
                    
                      Passports, travel and living abroad
                      
                    
                    
                      Visas and immigration
                      
                    
                    
                      Working, jobs and pensions
                      
                    
              
            

            
              
                Government activity
              
              
                    
                      Departments
                      Departments, agencies and public bodies

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

Reports, analysis and official statistics

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

Local leaders will be handed dedicated research and development (R&D) funding for the first time under plans unveiled by the Prime Minister today to spread opportunity, investment, and growth to every part of the country.

In a major speech at the Innovation Nation Summit in Manchester, the Prime Minister set out his vision to make Britain the best place in the world to innovate, build and grow by backing the people, places and industries that can define the country’s future.

Drawing on Britain’s state-of-the-art strengths in science, technology, and research, he argued that the next generation of breakthroughs should not only be discovered here, but developed, scaled, and commercialised here too.

We’ve got the finest minds working at the most prestigious universities, the most innovative companies and clusters producing some of the most advanced technologies.

We are doing so much right, but we can do so much more. We have good opportunities now in all of our nations and regions to deliver something that I’ve set as a mission as Prime Minister, good growth in every postcode.

Let’s really focus on that and bring innovation to all parts of the UK as well. We can grow our companies into global giants. We can extend the chain of human achievement. We can be the world’s innovation nation.

As part of the mission, established mayoral strategic authorities in England will for the first time receive dedicated devolved later-stage innovation funding, giving them the power to back the most promising innovation opportunities in their areas and build on local strengths.

This is a first step. As set out in the Rewiring the State Cabinet Statement we will devolve a substantially increased share of later-stage innovation funding to local leaders so they can back opportunities with the greatest potential for local growth. This will include areas beyond existing Established Mayoral Strategic Authorities.

This dedicated R&D funding will be complemented and sit alongside new Good Growth Funds which are a single, flexible, long-term growth budget, empowering local leaders to invest in the opportunities that will create jobs, attract investment, and raise living standards in their area.

The reforms mark a shift away from a system where too many decisions about regional innovation are taken at a national level, and towards one that gives places greater control over their economic future. By giving local leaders, the funding, flexibility, and support to build on their competitive strengths, the Government aims to unlock new investment, grow businesses and create better-paid jobs across the country.

The Government will also commit £1 billion through UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) over the next four years to support high-growth innovation clusters in the Industrial Strategy’s priority sectors across the UK, backing the places with the research excellence, businesses and skilled workers needed to turn new ideas into successful companies.

The speech forms part of the Prime Minister’s wider plan to ensure Britain captures more of the economic rewards from its world-class research and entrepreneurial talent. Alongside investment in regional innovation clusters, the Prime Minister set out measures to tackle barriers to growth, as well as national mission to defeat dementia.

No.10 North will also be tasked with bringing forward new partnerships between clusters in the Industrial Strategy’s eight growth-driving sectors, building on the success of the Cambridge and Manchester collaboration.

The first will connect the complementary strengths of the Northern Growth Corridor and the Oxford to Cambridge Growth Corridor in sectors including life sciences, digital and technology, and advanced manufacturing.

By connecting leading universities, innovative businesses, and local leaders across different parts of the country, the partnerships will help promising ideas move more quickly from research into commercial products, growing companies and skilled jobs.

They will also allow different places to combine their strengths and compete at the scale needed to attract international investment and lead in fast-growing global industries.

The reforms recognise that successful innovation depends on more than research funding alone. Businesses also need skilled workers, affordable space, modern infrastructure, access to finance and strong links with universities and public institutions. Putting more decisions in local hands will allow those different elements to be brought together around a clear plan for each area.

The package forms part of the Prime Minister’s wider plan to reindustrialise Britain by turning more home-grown ideas into successful businesses that scale in the UK.

Britain has world-class universities, researchers, and entrepreneurs, but too many discoveries fail to translate into major companies, productive investment and well-paid jobs in the communities where they began.

The Government’s new approach will combine national investment with greater local control, enabling Whitehall to focus on the decisions only central government can take while giving local leaders the freedom to build on the distinctive strengths of their areas.

It will also create a stronger partnership between government, business, and universities, bringing together the institutions needed to take an idea from the laboratory to the factory floor and the global market.

Share on Facebook
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
        
          
            
                
                  
                
                      Share on X
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
    



          

          
                        



          
      

        
          
                      
  
      



      

    Explore the topic

  
        Business and industry

  






          
        
    
    
  


      
          

  

  
    
      
        Is this page useful?
        
          
            
              Maybe
          
          
            
              Yes this page is useful
          
          

            
              No this page is not useful
          
        
      
    

    
      Thank you for your feedback
    

    
      
        Report a problem with this page
    
  


  

  
    
      

      

      Help us improve GOV.UK
      Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
        Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab ).