https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ckgj921e14jdo
datePublished: 2026-10-10T04:07:11.304Z (10 Oct 05:07 BST)
dateModified: 2026-10-10T04:07:11.304Z (10 Oct 05:07 BST)

Trump says Nobel Peace Prize an 'indelible stain' on Norway
US President Donald Trump has once again made complaints that he did not receive the Nobel Peace Prize, calling this year's decision "disgraceful and embarrassing".
The prize was awarded to former International Criminal Court judge Navi Pillay on Friday. Hours after the announcement, Donald Trump told a rally he had "never heard" of the "mystery person".
"This is an indelible stain on the country of Norway" he said, adding "we will not forget".
Trump has been outspoken about his desire to win the prize, and made similar criticisms in 2025 when it was awarded to Venezuelan opposition leader María Corina Machado.
Last year, Norway's Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre explained to Trump it was an independent committee based in Norway, not the Norwegian government, which decides who will receive the prize.
Speaking to his supporters at a rally in Syracuse, New York, the US president repeated claims that he had settled eight wars and was "about to settle or win two more", without providing evidence.
"The Nobel Peace Prize has been forever discredited by a handful of radical ideologues who are anti-democracy and really enemies of civilisation," he said.
Watch: Who is Nobel Peace Prize winner Navi Pillay?
Pillay, a former UN human rights chief and International Court of Justice judge, was recognised "for her efforts to promote peace and international law", which paved the way for a "more comprehensive global legal order", the Nobel committee said.
The South African's work had been "instrumental in ensuring that war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide are prosecuted", said the chair of the Norwegian Nobel Committee Jørgen Watne Frydnes.
Shortly afterwards, the 85-year-old reacted to the news from Nuremberg's Palace of Justice by saying "it must be a joke" and thanked those who had gathered to applaud her.
"If you clap a little bit more I may share this prize with Trump," she joked.
Last year, the president openly expressed his displeasure at missing out on the prize, with the White House accusing the committee of placing "politics over peace".
In January, Machado gifted her medal to Trump during a meeting at the White House, which she said was in recognition of his commitment to her country's freedom.
Trump said on social media that the move was "a wonderful gesture of mutual respect".
The Nobel committee later clarified that the prize was not transferable.
"Once a Nobel Prize is announced, it cannot be revoked, shared, or transferred to others," it said in a statement. "The decision is final and stands for all time."
Venezuelan Nobel Peace Prize winner presents her medal to Trump
Trump ties Greenland demands to Nobel Prize in message to Norway leader
White House blasts Nobel Committee for not awarding Peace Prize to Trump