https://edition.cnn.com/2026/10/09/americas/panama-earthquake-latam-intl
datePublished: 2026-10-09T18:47:05.131Z (09 Oct 19:47 BST)
dateModified: 2026-10-10T03:51:09.763Z (10 Oct 04:51 BST)

Video Ad Feedback CNN photojournalist describes powerful Panama earthquake 2:08 • Source: CNN CNN photojournalist describes powerful Panama earthquake 2:08 Earthquakes South America Federal agencies See all topics Facebook Tweet Email Link Threads Link Copied! Follow A major earthquake with a preliminary magnitude of 7.7 has struck southern Panama, according to the US Geological Survey.
Several people have suffered minor injuries but so far there are no reports of fatalities or missing persons, officials said. Various homes, roads, hotels, government buildings, businesses and churches have sustained structural damage, according to the civil protection system.
The USGS had said some casualties were possible and extensive damage was probable. The earthquake was followed by 147 aftershocks, director of the Emergency Operations Center René García told CNN. Some of those aftershocks reached magnitudes of 6.1 or 6.6.
García said authorities are waiting for the tremors to subside before conducting structural inspections of damaged buildings. The most significant damage has been reported in Coclé province on the nation’s southern coast, although some has also been seen in the capital, Panama City.
Footage verified by CNN shows several damaged buildings in Penonome, some 70 miles from the epicenter. One video shows a church with a partially collapsed steeple and another building with a crumbled facade.
In the popular resort town Playa Venao, a multi-story building collapsed and crushed several cars beneath it.
Along the Panama Canal, the Centennial Bridge’s suspension cables were seen shaking as vehicles drove through.
The canal authority said operations were continuing as normal and that staff were inspecting facilities for damage.
Video Ad Feedback Strong earthquake rocks Panama 1:51 • Source: CNN Strong earthquake rocks Panama 1:51 Panama City’s public transit system has suspended service on two metro lines and evacuated passengers from some stations.
Scores of residents gathered in the streets of the capital after rushing out of their buildings in a panic.
“I am on the ninth floor here and yes it was felt strongly,” Panama City resident Kevin Cortez told Reuters.
“Everything was moving: the lamp, the chair, the table,” another resident said. “I decided to stay and wait because I knew running down the stairs was a problem. So I stayed waiting for it to pass. I had no other option. Yes, we felt it was quite prolonged. People running, shouting; not everyone takes it the same way, but well, here we are, downstairs.”
The Education Ministry has canceled classes nationwide for the rest of the day.
Panama’s main international airport was temporarily closed as a precaution and flights were diverted to other airports before operations resumed later in the day, the civil aviation authority said.
The water and sewage institute has reported interruptions at several water treatment plants due to power outages caused by the quake.
Panama’s President José Raúl Mulino has called for calm and instructed the minister of government to provide information on the earthquake’s effects. He has also mobilized resources to those affected.
Mulino visited an affected hospital in Penonome, where several patients were evacuated and have had to receive treatment outdoors.
Earlier, the US Tsunami Warning System warned of possible tsunami waves along some coasts, before saying there was no longer a threat.
Video Ad Feedback New video shows people pouring into the streets as a powerful quake hits Panama 0:47 • Source: CNN New video shows people pouring into the streets as a powerful quake hits Panama 0:47 This is just the latest powerful earthquake to have struck Latin America this year. Over the summer, Venezuela was hit by two powerful earthquakes that killed more than 6,400 people, while Colombia suffered a tremor that left around 300 dead.
The leaders of both countries have offered to help Panama’s government as it responds to the disaster.