https://www.gov.uk/government/news/joint-statement-on-support-for-the-international-criminal-court
datePublished: 2026-10-09T17:22:00+01:00 (09 Oct 17:22 BST)
dateModified: 2026-10-09T17:22:00+01:00 (09 Oct 17:22 BST)

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
Joint statement from the Foreign Ministers of Canada, Denmark, Germany, France, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands and the UK.
We, the undersigned States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC), reaffirm our continued and unwavering support for the independence, impartiality, and integrity of the ICC.
As committed supporters of the ICC we regret and strongly disagree with the announcement of sanctions to be imposed upon the Court by the United States.
We note with appreciation the work undertaken by the Court to prepare for such measures so that the Court can continue to fulfil its mandate under the Rome Statute and we underline our unwavering support in enabling the Court in doing so.
Nevertheless, if put into effect, these sanctions will have a significant impact on the Court’s work, its dedicated staff and their families. They work every day to bring those accused of the most serious international crimes to justice and to support their victims.
We remain both united in our support for the ICC and committed to engaging in constructive and inclusive dialogue with non-States Parties as we prepare for the Assembly of States Parties in December 2026. We will continue to work together to support the Court’s vital work, uphold the rules-based international system, and advance accountability.
To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab ).