URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c5zjzjgdeneeo
BBC News — confirmed published 1 October 2026, 17:27 GMT (18:27 BST). Authors: Oliver Smith, Simon Jack, Archie Mitchell.
Headline: "UK in talks with EU partners to release strategic fuel reserves if needed, BBC understands"

Britain is in talks with EU partners to release additional strategic fuel reserves, including diesel, if needed, the BBC understands. The talks come after President Donald Trump threatened to ban diesel exports from the US in a bid to reduce record prices at the pumps for Americans.

The US is a vital supplier of diesel to the world, exporting between 1.2 and 1.5 million barrels per day; experts warn a ban on shipments abroad could put further pressure on prices in other countries.

QUOTE (Donald Trump, President of the United States, on an export ban, at the weekend): "We're thinking about it very seriously."

Energy Minister Martin McCluskey was on a call with European counterparts on Thursday to discuss the potential ban. A source familiar with the discussions told the BBC it was prudent to prepare a co-ordinated response with other countries, including those across the EU, but added there were still European reserves left from a coordinated release of strategic fuel stocks earlier in the year.

QUOTE (UK government spokesperson): "We have a diverse and resilient supply. We continue to engage with our international partners and the UK fuel industry."
The government stressed there is no cause for concern about potential diesel shortages, though prices are expected to rise further.

QUOTE (European Commission spokesperson, today): there were "lots of calls, lots of meetings" taking place on the diesel situation, including with "high level contacts" in the US administration.

Context: prices of petrol and diesel globally have skyrocketed since the outbreak of the US-Israel war in Iran in February. The closure of the Strait of Hormuz, which typically carries around a fifth of the world's oil and gas, has pushed up the price of products made from oil. An export ban from Russia, also a major diesel supplier, has added to the pressure.

QUOTE (David Fyfe, chief economist, Argus Media): cutting off American supply would likely cause international prices to skyrocket.
