URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmdx5xw36492o
BBC News, published Thu 1 Oct 2026 17:51 BST

UK-Iranian dual national arrested over RAF Fairford incident, police say

A heavy police presence could be seen near the base after a major incident was declared on Sunday

Two armed counter-terror police maintain road blocks and security checks around RAF Fairford both are wearing full black uniforms, helmets and are carrying guns.

A UK-Iranian dual national has been arrested on suspicion of preparation of terrorist acts in connection with the incident at RAF Fairford, counter-terror police have said.

The 27-year-old man was arrested in Westminster, London. A second man, a 26-year-old UK national, has also been questioned under caution, and two properties in the area have been searched.

Five men in their twenties who were arrested near the Gloucestershire airbase on Sunday remain on police bail. All five were UK nationals from London.

Counter-terror police are considering \"all possible angles - including foreign state involvement\", the force's senior national coordinator Vicki Evans said.

\"The investigation into circumstances surrounding events in Gloucestershire is hugely complex, and our specialist teams are interrogating multiple lines of enquiry,\" she said.

\"I'd like to thank the public for their continued support and patience whilst we work through this investigation.\"

Prime Minister Andy Burnham said on Wednesday there were \"strong indications\" that Iran played a part in the incident. He did not provide further details, and Tehran has strongly denied any involvement.

The five men were arrested in the early hours of Sunday morning after \"three suspicious vehicles\" were reported travelling towards the base operated by the US Air Force (USAF), sparking a major security incident.

The BBC understands that one of the men had dialled 999 himself, about an hour before a local farmer alerted police to a \"large group\" of masked men near the vehicles.

They were arrested on suspicion of explosives offences and later on suspicion of preparing a terrorist act, before being released on bail on Monday in what police called an \"investigative decision\" that was \"grounded in experience and strategy\".

Police said a quantity of petrol but no explosive devices were found during searches of vans near the site.

The group were aged between 23 and 25. Four live in Westminster and one in Camden, and searches of their homes were carried out.

US Secretary of State Marco Rubio said on Monday that \"the hands of a foreign actor\" had clearly been involved in the incident at the base, which has been used as a forward operating location by the USAF for decades.

In recent months, US bombers have taken off from the airbase for the Middle East, after the UK approved a US request to use it for defensive strikes on Iran.

Follow for live updates on this story.

Guillem Balague on why Ronaldo walked out after being left on the bench

More on the new driving changes.

Anthony Joshua reassures fans that he will be in the ring to fight Tyson Fury in December.

White casts doubt on Fury-Joshua after 24 hours of chaos

Watch The Celebrity Traitors on BBC iPlayer.

More on Esther Rantzen's life and career.

Learn more about the Empty Chairs movement.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

More on the night sky events to look out for this autumn.

Listen to Here For The History on BBC Sounds.

More on The Celebrity Traitors.