URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/crz6z636gx9zo
BBC News (South Yorkshire) — confirmed published 1 October 2026, RSS pubDate Thu, 01 Oct 2026 16:32:21 GMT (page read "3 hours ago" at fetch ~20:37 BST). Author Lucy Ashton, South Yorkshire political reporter. Retrieved via Exa web_fetch 1 Oct 2026 ~20:37 BST.

HEADLINE: Reigniting Brexit vote will 'open door to Reform'
Image caption: Reform UK Leader Nigel Farage held a rally at Doncaster Racecourse [BBC/Lucy Ashton]

Reform UK Leader Nigel Farage says the Prime Minister has "opened the door to Reform in the most extraordinary way" by reigniting the Brexit debate.
Speaking ahead of a rally of party members in Doncaster, Farage said he was "very surprised" Andy Burnham had discussed rejoining the European Union.
The Prime Minister promised in his first Labour Party conference speech to set out options on the country's ties to Brussels. He later acknowledged this could include an option to rejoin if that is what public opinion favoured.
Farage also said the Reform group on City of Doncaster City Council was "not perfect" and disagreed with comments made by the Reform leader on the council.
Kicking off a nationwide tour at Doncaster Racecourse, Farage said: "Burnham was popular but I think by saying to people, let's have a debate again, let's have a referendum again on whether we rejoin the European Union, will not make him very popular at all.
"It will actually lead to increased division in communities. Here I am in Doncaster where 70% voted Leave and a decade later the Prime Minister is saying sorry chaps, you got it wrong, we've got to rethink this.
"I don't think it'll prove very popular at all. I have to be honest with you I'm very surprised that he said it."
Speaking to reporters, he added: "Here in Doncaster and across the North of England, I think what he's done is open the door to Reform in the most extraordinary way."
Reform have the majority of councillors on Doncaster Council, although it is led by a directly-elected Labour Mayor, Ros Jones. Since the local elections in 2025 Reform has had three leaders in the city.
Asked about this Farage said: "We are the largest individual group and there are chops and changes, people get elected to local government but they have the rest of their lives to lead. This is not unique to us, it happens to other parties as well. Is it perfect? No, it certainly isn't. The principles, ideas and values upon which they were elected remain."
Doncaster's Reform leader Howard Rimmer was recently criticised after he told a council meeting that as the borough was meeting its housebuilding targets, it meant there was no housing crisis. Farage said he did not know Doncaster "intimately" but there was "a housing crisis everywhere" due to high rents and the cost of living crisis.
He also spoke about early prison releases as hundreds of prisoners across England and Wales were released today under a new scheme designed to free up prison space.
"Whilst I'm never shy at criticising the Labour government, the fact is they inherited a nightmare, the Conservatives had 14 years to build more prison places.
"The population has increased in the last 20 years, there is no doubt there is more criminality now than 20 years ago and we need to build more prisons, there's no way around it."
