URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ck1e5ejwvp17o
BBC News (Yorkshire) — confirmed published 1 October 2026 (RSS pubDate Thu, 01 Oct 2026 13:57:09 GMT; page read "5 hours ago" at fetch). Authors Alex Moss (reporting from HMP Leeds) and Flora Grafton (reporting from HMP Wealstun); additional reporting Simon Thake at HMP Moorland. Retrieved via Exa web_fetch 1 Oct 2026 ~20:37 BST.

HEADLINE: Freed inmates warn not all ready for early release

Newly freed prisoners released as part of the government's scheme to ease overcrowding have voiced their concerns some of those let out early could end up back behind bars.
Around 700 people are leaving prisons across England and Wales under the early prisoner release plan - with a further 3,800 scheduled for release over the next year.
Those freed on Thursday had been serving sentences of up to 19 months, but were released after completing 33% rather than 50% of their term.
More than 30 prisoners were expected to be released from HMP Wealstun, near Wetherby.
At HMP Wealstun, inmate James Baker walked out into the autumnal sunshine dressed in his grey tracksuit, clutching a blue bag filled with his belongings. Baker, who was jailed for 12 months in July for shoplifting, said he was happy to be out but felt some prisoners eligible under the scheme were not ready for the move.
"I think it will help some people, but I think other people will just come straight back to be honest with you. I don't think some of them are ready to be released yet, but they are getting the release, so they are just going out and I think there will be a lot of people coming back."
Asked what the conditions were like inside the jail, Baker said it was "overcrowded". He added: "They're not the best, but they're not too bad. They could be better, I think all prisons could be better."
More than 20 miles away in Armley, a small media scrum gathered from early in the morning awaiting the release of inmates at HMP Leeds. One of those was Jordan Laverack, who walked through the category B prison's imposing wooden gate just after 10:30 BST. With his arms raised in the air, the 26-year-old, who had served four weeks of an eight week jail term for missing a probation appointment, said he was happy to be out and was planning on going to KFC.
Laverack, from Leeds, praised the early release scheme but said he understood why there would be concern over people who had committed a "heinous crime". "I think early release is good for myself, but I can see why there's a lot of attention."
He said while he had been released from prison with no permanent address, he would go and stay with friends, but feared some of those without a place to stay would fall back into crime.
"I just want to get myself some work, some employment, make my family proud, maybe get a girlfriend, get married, you never know," he told the BBC.
Asked about conditions inside he said: "Prison is no good for anyone. It's not clean, you can smell the toilet, the bed and mattress will make you itch. It's not a good place." He added: "It's quite crowded. It's not great. But I wasn't expecting a four-star hotel."
The plan has been strongly criticised by victims, including Helen Duncanson from North Yorkshire, who says she is suffering from "night terrors and panic" after being told her abuser could be eligible for early release.
Another offender to leave HMP Leeds was Matthew Johnson, released after serving six months of an 18-month jail term for ABH. He described the prison as "hectic and overcrowded". The 34-year-old from Wakefield said he had spent his time in jail working in a cleaning role. "I've got my certificates and be doing what I can," he said. "I've just got to get on with my life now and see my kids."
Meanwhile, in South Yorkshire, a newly released prisoner from HMP Moorland who gave his name as Rob said he was leaving after serving six months of an 18-month ABH sentence. He said: "Not all of this lot should be released early. Some are terrible."
Ministry of Justice data showed as of Monday 87,499 people were incarcerated, taking prison population levels up to 98.2%.
