URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c9n747kgx6evo
BBC News Scotland — confirmed published 1 October 2026 (RSS pubDate Thu, 01 Oct 2026 17:31:33 GMT; page read "4 minutes ago" at fetch ~20:34 BST). Retrieved via Exa web_fetch 1 Oct 2026 ~20:34 BST.

HEADLINE: Hundreds of jobs under threat at Grangemouth chemical plant
Image caption: Syngenta said its Grangemouth facility was "no longer competitive"

Hundreds of jobs are under threat in Grangemouth after an agricultural chemical firm announced plans to cease operations at the site.
Syngenta said it had been unable to make its business at the plant "competitive" in the face of "increasing international competition".
A spokesperson for the company - which manufactures chemicals used for the protection of crops - said it would enter a consultation period over the move, but added a final decision has yet to be taken.
The Economy Secretary, Stephen Flynn, described the plans as "extremely disappointing".
A total of 377 workers are set to be affected by the move.
It comes over a year after Syngenta was awarded £2.2m from Scottish Enterprise to expand production at the site.
Syngenta added that it was "committed to genuine consultation" with trade unions over "alternative paths" for the site. The firm said it had undertaken a "detailed review" of its Grangemouth operation prior to the plans being announced. It said the Grangemouth site was "significantly more expensive" to operate than other production facilities. The company added that savings had been identified in some areas of the business, but these fell short in "bridging the site's competitiveness gap".
Mike Hollands, president of Syngenta UK, said: "The workforce at Grangemouth is highly skilled and passionate, but despite all efforts, we have not been able to make the Grangemouth site competitive compared to alternative supply options. It is with a very heavy heart that we make this proposal, but we are committed to a constructive consultation and will continue to consider options as part of that process."
It is the latest job loss blow to the area following the closure of the nearby oil refinery in April last year, which also resulted in the loss of about 400 jobs. In March, bus manufacturer Alexander Dennis announced plans to close its Falkirk plant with 115 roles lost.
The UK government, under then-Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer, previously pledged an additional £200m in funding for Grangemouth from the National Wealth Fund.
Flynn said the Scottish government had "strongly opposed" Syngenta's plans. He said he would continue to press the UK government on the £200m funding pot. "My thoughts are with the workers, their families and the local community who will be affected by this decision," he said. "We made clear to Syngenta's board our strong opposition to any potential scale down or closure of their Grangemouth site."
Flynn added: "During this period of consultation, I sincerely hope that the UK government will now provide some of the £200m committed to Grangemouth, since not a single penny has yet been allocated from that fund promised in 2024."
The Scottish Green Party co-leader, Gillian Mackay, said the move was another "devastating blow" for the area. "Our governments should be doing more to protect jobs and ensure that workers can benefit from our transition to a greener future," she said. "Grangemouth is my home, and I am concerned about what this will mean for the local community if it goes ahead."
