URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ckge4eql4q7eo
BBC News, published Thu 1 Oct 2026 19:25 BST

What happened in the failed execution of Christa Pike - and what next?

Christa Pike enters a courtroom in 2007

What we know after Christa Pike survived two lethal injections

US convicted murderer Christa Pike is in \"critical condition, receiving life-saving care\" at hospital after Tennessee authorities failed to execute her by lethal injection, her lawyer says.

The case of Pike, whose attempted execution had already been the subject of a high-profile legal battle, has raised a number of questions.

These include what went wrong, what happens next, and - for opponents of the death penalty - fresh concerns around the suffering of an inmate when an execution does not go to plan.

A review into what happened has been ordered and executions in Tennessee have been halted for the rest of the year, Governor Bill Lee said.

Pike, 50, was sentenced to death in 1996 for the murder of 19-year-old Colleen Slemmer, an attack that was perpetrated alongside her then-boyfriend Tadaryl Shipp.

She was scheduled to be put to death on Wednesday evening, local time. The injections were allowed by the US Supreme Court at the eleventh hour after the legal battle.

Pike was given two syringes of the drug pentobarbital, though her legal team said these failed to stop her heartbeat and that she could still be heard snoring.

Watch: Witnesses recount Christa Pike's failed execution attempt

The Tennessee Department of Correction defended the method it used, saying \"the protocol does not allow for additional procedures beyond what was carried out this evening\".

The state protocol does not clearly specify what should happen if an inmate remains alive after a second dose, according to the AP news agency.

Authorities have yet to provide their explanation of why the dosage given to Pike proved to be non-fatal, although medical experts have provided theories of their own.

Dr Joel Zivot, a professor at the Emory University School of Medicine, told the BBC he had been retained by Pike's legal team as a medical expert and that Pike probably never achieved a sufficient blood level of pentobarbital to cause her breath to stop or heart failure.

The state correction department added that Pike had been taken to an off-site medical facility.

One of her lawyers said on Wednesday night she was \"being provided life-saving measures\" in hospital.

On Thursday, lawyer Randy Spivey told reporters: \"We don't have a sense of her prognosis or much update on her health at the moment.\"

He added: \"But we do know that that she is alive right now.\"

In his emailed comments to the BBC, Zivot said: \"It's very possible that as a consequence of the delay of the beginning of resuscitation she will have a brain injury.\"

A third-party review has been ordered by state Governor Bill Lee, who said on Thursday that Tennessee will halt executions for the rest of the year.

This could impact any additional attempt by the state to execute Pike in the near-term, if she does regain consciousness. Her current state is not clear.

May Martinez, the mother of Colleen Slemmer who had pushed for Pike's execution to take place, told NBC News the events had been \"a mess\".

Colleen Slemmer was tortured and brutally killed by Pike and her boyfriend

Historically, the US Supreme Court has not halted second attempts at executions, said John Mills, an attorney who works with inmates sentenced to death.

In 2024, it allowed the state of Alabama to proceed with a second execution of Kenneth Eugene Smith, after their attempt to execute him by lethal injection failed two years before. Alabama used an experimental oxygen deprivation method to put Smith to death.

A notable Supreme Court case from 1947 allowed the state of Louisiana to attempt a second electrocution of Willie Smith, a black teenager whose first execution attempt failed when he was 17 years old.

The court found a second execution would not violate the Constitution's prohibitions against double jeopardy or cruel and unusual punishment, and Smith was executed aged 18.

\"If the question is, is it likely the federal courts would intervene in a second attempt? I'm afraid the answer is a resounding no,\" Mills said of Pike's case.

Pike's lawyers have already filed a motion to stay her execution.

Mills said that if he was her lawyer, he would be asking the federal courts to reconsider their views on a second attempt and \"would also be looking at the Tennessee constitution and ask the Tennessee courts to reconsider\".

Mills added that he would also approach Governor Lee, who has powers to issue stays of executions and exercise clemency.

Opponents of the death penalty have been quick to react.

Maya Foa, the chief executive of international legal organisation Reprieve, said: \"We cannot know exactly what went wrong, because so much happened behind a curtain – lethal injection relies on secrecy at every stage, to hide the violence of the state taking a human life.\"

Authorities are yet to say whether they will try again to execute Pike. There is a historical precedent of authorities making a second attempt to execute those on death row.

Meanwhile Shipp, Pike's boyfriend and co-defendant, remains in prison, having been spared the death penalty under state law. He was 17 at the time that Slemmer was killed.

What is the drug pentobarbital?

Pentobarbital is a potent sedative that slows down the body, including the nervous system. Doctors sometimes use it as a treatment for certain conditions, but in high doses it can also be used as a lethal injection to cause death.

Its use in lethal injections came under renewed scrutiny last year after a US federal government review - which took place under the presidency of Joe Biden - raised concerns about the drug's potential for \"unnecessary pain and suffering\".

His government banned its use in federal executions but that did not bind individual states such as Tennessee, which can choose their own methods.

In recent years, states have found some drugs needed for lethal injections harder to come by, because pharmaceutical companies have opposed the use of their products for such purposes.

The Tennessee Department of Correction has not specifically addressed an allegation from Pike's legal team that the pentobarbital it used was \"degraded\". Drugs may degrade for a number of reasons, including if it has aged beyond its use-by date and its potency has decreased.

The department issued a broader defence of its method, writing in a statement: \"The lethal injection chemical in the protocol has consistently been effective.\"

Some manufacturers have explicitly said they will no longer produce pentobarbital or will restrict their use in executions, according to Alexis Hoag-Fordjor, Co-Director of the Center for Criminal Justice at Brooklyn Law School.

In 2024, for instance, the manufacturer Absolute Standards said it would no longer make the drug.