URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c62l8588y5v9o
BBC News NI — confirmed published 1 October 2026, 10:08 BST, UPDATED "2 minutes ago" at fetch; RSS pubDate for the update Thu, 01 Oct 2026 17:16:56 GMT under the headline "Orange Order delegation arrives at Hillsborough Castle for talks with SoS". Retrieved via Exa web_fetch 1 Oct 2026 ~20:35 BST.

HEADLINE (as served at 20:35 BST): Orange Order says no proposals on table for resolution to Drumcree dispute
Image caption: Members of the Portadown district of the Orange Order met the Secretary of State Sir Chris Bryant, accompanied by Jamie Bryson, on Wednesday

Talks aimed at resolving the Drumcree dispute are expected to continue, as Portadown District Master Nigel Dawson says "there are currently no proposals on the table."
Both sides were given a document during separate meetings with the Secretary of State, Sir Chris Bryant, on Wednesday.
After its meeting, the chairman of the resident's coalition said his group would agree to it, if the Orange Order did.
On Sunday, an Orange Order parade from Drumcree into Portadown did not happen because of a large protest on the mainly-nationalist Garvaghy Road.
Protesters have remained on the Garvaghy Road, although in much smaller numbers, and the Orange Order have maintained a presence at Drumcree, about a mile away.
On Thursday, The Nolan Show revealed details of what was in the document.
The BBC understands it said the Orange Order had the legal right to walk the Garvaghy Road, the residents would accept that legal entitlement and publicly accept that it was wrong to block the Orange Order from walking down the Garvaghy Road, but in return the Orange Order would choose not to walk down the road anyway.
On Wednesday, the Democratic Unionist Party's (DUP) Carla Lockhart told the Press Association that: "What's on the table is not acceptable."
Sir Chris has been involved in discussions with the Orange Order and Garvaghy Road residents since Monday.
Talks are not likely to resume until later. Sir Chris had flown to England on Wednesday night for private reasons but it is understood he intends to return to Hillsborough Castle on Thursday evening.
The Police Service of Northern Ireland's (PSNI) Chief Constable Jon Boutcher will address the dispute at a public meeting of the Policing Board in Belfast on Thursday. The parade dispute is expected to dominate the agenda. Board members will want to hear the chief constable's security assessment of the situation, and will receive an update on the PSNI's criminal investigation into the protest which blocked the Garvaghy Road.
One of the board members, Sinn Fein's Deirdre Hargey, was photographed taking part in the protest and unionists have said she should be barred from attending the meeting.
WEDNESDAY: Chief Constable Jon Boutcher said a "large scale criminal investigation" was under way into the unlawful blocking of Garvaghy Road, which prevented Sunday's parade.
First Minister Michelle O'Neill has been accused by the DUP leader Gavin Robinson of breaking the law in taking part in demonstrations on Sunday. In response, O'Neill said on Wednesday if she is investigated then "so be it, that's the chief constable's job". "I can only focus on what I'm focusing on right now which is - I've made a choice to be here top stand on the Garvaghy Road with these residents and I will continue to do so."
Speaking after a meeting with the chief constable, Robinson said the DUP have given him their expectation "that within days, if not a week, we need to see the positive out workings of [the investigation]".
BACKGROUND: In 1998 the newly-established Parades Commission ruled the Orange Order should not march down the road - a decision upheld for the last 28 years. The row reemerged last month after a court case in which a ruling by the Parades Commission was overturned, and a fresh application was lodged. On Friday the commission decided the march could go ahead with restrictions; that decision was challenged in several Belfast courts on Saturday before finally being given the go-ahead hours before it was due to take place.
