URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/9/30/economic-war-is-iran-losing-its-leverage-over-the-strait-of-hormuz
Al Jazeera (Usaid Siddiqui) — published 2026-09-30T12:05:45Z

At the UN General Assembly last week, Tehran and Washington engaged in three hours of indirect talks, as US special envoys Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner met Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi.
Iran proposed a seven-day roadmap under which the Strait of Hormuz could be reopened and normal maritime traffic restored if Washington meets Tehran's conditions — ending the naval blockade on Iran, easing sanctions and releasing frozen Iranian funds — a plan Trump categorically rejected.
On Wednesday, Reuters reported that Araghchi had received US feedback on the proposal through Qatari mediators. An official briefed on the talks said the main disagreement now centred on the SEQUENCING of measures rather than the components of the plan.
QUOTE (Negar Mortazavi, analyst, as quoted by Al Jazeera): "Iran is offering compromise in order to stop the war, not capitulation under pressure." / "There has to be something in return from the US." / warned of a "danger" if Trump misreads Iran's willingness to compromise as weakness: "That could instead prolong the war."
Al Jazeera's companion explainer (https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/9/29/us-iran-talks-in-new-york-whats-the-latest, 29 Sep 2026) carries:
QUOTE (Araghchi, late Monday, via Telegram): "I state firmly that there has been no change in Iran's position. Our conditions for opening the strait are clear. Our position on other issues is also clear. At present, there has been no discussion at all about flexibility."
QUOTE (Araghchi): "Our discussion is clear. Right now, it is only about the Strait of Hormuz." / "The opening of the Strait of Hormuz is also subject to the fulfilment of a series of conditions that we announced to the other side."
QUOTE (Araghchi to NBC, Sunday): "We are fully prepared for the time for the war to be resumed, and I repeat, we stand firm in the face of any new aggression, even if it comes to a doomsday war."
Al Jazeera reports Iran's demands include releasing an estimated $12bn in frozen Iranian assets and a wider regional ceasefire including Lebanon.
