URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cklyjy9pv93yo
BBC News | datePublished=2026-09-30T22:38:33.428Z dateModified=2026-09-30T22:38:33.428Z
TITLE: Conservatives pledge 'tough love' benefit rules for under-25s - BBC News

Tory leader Kemi Badenoch (left) with shadow work and pensions secretary Helen Whately in London last week

The Conservatives have said they would introduce new work requirements for under-25s claiming benefits in a "tough love" approach to youth joblessness.

Under the proposals, young people who are fit to work but have not worked for six months continuously would face new rules to qualify for payments, including daily attendance at a job centre or courses.

The party says the scheme would help tackle the almost one million people aged 16 to 24 in the UK who are not in education, employment or training, known as Neets.

But anti-poverty charity Trussell has warned that people on Universal Credit can already not afford basic essentials, harming their ability to find and keep work.

Under the Tory proposals, those aged 18 to 24 who apply for Universal Credit but have not previously worked for a continuous period of six months or more, for at least 16 hours per week, would instead have to take part in a "Get to Work" scheme.

Rather than Universal Credit, they would receive a "Get to Work Allowance" paid at the same rate but requiring daily attendance at a job centre, on work experience or work readiness courses.

They would be assigned a manager and have to take part in job search workshops and interview preparation sessions.

The programme would last six months, or less if a participant secures a job - but those who are still unemployed after half a year on the scheme would have their benefit cut by 30%.

Young people on Universal Credit who have previously worked for six months, have health issues or care responsibilities would be exempt.

The party has also said it would look closer at whether parents' earnings and savings should be factored into welfare payments for their children.

However, it said young people without parental support, including those whoa re estranged, would continue to have a safety net.

Shadow work and pensions secretary Helen Whately said the measures were designed to "show some tough love" to reduce the number of Neets.

"Too many young people are leaving school and signing straight onto benefits - this is a waste of their potential and a disaster for our economy," the Tory MP said.

Under current Universal Credit requirements, external, people have to sign a "claimant commitment" to prepare for and look for work or increase their earnings if they are already working - but the Tories claim their rules would be stricter.

The proposals were announced on Thursday ahead of the party's conference starting this weekend.

Neets have been high on the agenda for political parties ahead of the imminent publication of a major report by former minister Alan Milburn on how to tackle the one-in-eight young people in the UK who not in education, employment or training.

At Labour's conference earlier this week, Chancellor John Healey told party activists: "The best thing we can offer a young person is not a benefit payment - it's a first job with training and a wage."

He said cutting welfare spending was a priority and announced that every mayor in England would have access to a Local Apprenticeships Service from March 2027 to generate thousands more youth opportunities.

And on Thursday, the Department for Work and Pensions said every small and medium-sized business hiring a young apprentice would get £2,000 from the government under a new scheme backed by the Federation of Small Businesses.

Best thing we can offer young people is a job, not benefits, says chancellor

Tories would prevent long-term jobless spending benefits on alcohol and cigarettes

One in eight young people still out of work or education ahead of major review

Sign up for our Politics Essential newsletter to keep up with the inner workings of Westminster and beyond.

Are you among those to make a purchase? Are you planning to?

To load Comments you need to enable JavaScript in your browser

Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC

Hundreds of prisoners being let out today as new early release scheme starts

We fear for our lives after being told our abusive exes will be freed from jail early

US death row inmate survives execution attempt after two lethal injections

Plummeting Israel flight like 'rollercoaster', says passenger. VideoPlummeting Israel flight like 'rollercoaster', says passenger

Celebrity Traitors is back - here's what you need to know ahead of the first show

Energy bills are rising by £60 a year - here's what you can do about it

The Papers: 'Israel's 9/11 stopped' and 'That was a great life'

Son who used AI to help save mum's life hopes case offers Parkinson's clues

Cornell case spotlights 'confusing' web of systems for reporting campus assaults

How That's Life! gave Esther Rantzen a career-defining moment

US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter

Tiny image sparks big backlash in Nikon photo contest

Who is the 'hero' Indian pilot who was stabbed on Israel-bound flight?

'Israel's 9/11 stopped' and 'That was a great life'

AI boom could trigger market shocks, Bank of England boss warns

Conservatives pledge 'tough love' benefit rules for under-25s

Too early to say if Iran involved in Dubai-Tel Aviv flight attack, Israeli PM says

Tributes paid to 'inspirational' presenter and campaigner Esther Rantzen

China has cracked down on AI relationships. Is it ahead of the game?

Vape tax comes into effect - but prices won't rise yet

New legal drama from the makers of the hit series The Split

The fascinating story of the birth of Jodrell Bank

Indulge in all three series of the gritty French crime drama

Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.