URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c6grveejg1e2o
BBC News (Michael Teferi and Lucy Fleming) — published 2026-09-30T15:04:32Z. NOTE: bbc.co.uk is WebFetch-blocked this session; text below is from Exa snippets quoting the article's own words.

At least 52 civilians have been killed during three days of heavy fighting around Alamata in Ethiopia's northern Tigray region, hospital sources have told the BBC.
It appears government troops have taken control of the town from regional fighters and intend to push north towards Mekelle, the region's main city. Social media clips show army tanks on Alamata's streets.
Clashes broke out last week after months of tension between the government and the party that controls Tigray, with both accusing each other of violating a 2022 deal that ended a two-year civil war.
The Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF) says it was responding to a federal offensive, including drone strikes, while the government says Tigrayan forces attacked first after seizing control of airports in the region.
The BBC is unable to report from Tigray and surrounding areas; communications to the region have been cut.
Over the last few days, medical charity Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) said more than 700 wounded people had been admitted to hospitals it supports in Tigray.
The doctor at Alamata General Hospital, who requested anonymity, told the BBC the fighting in and around the town took place between Saturday and Monday and involved heavy explosives and artillery, some of which landed in residential homes. Those killed in the crossfire included children as young as three days old, mothers and cattle herders. Twelve people died in a single strike on the town's marketplace, the medic said.
QUOTE (doctor at Alamata General Hospital, anonymous): "The local people, they are still scared of what might happen. The military presence here in the town has remained and a larger military force has been seen leaving the town heading north."
QUOTE (separate source in Alamata, to the BBC): "All the residents of the surrounding areas entered the town of Alamata by walking on foot for as long as an hour, hoping the town would be safe. Unfortunately, everything is blocked - no banking service, no money transfer, no power, no internet, no phone. Hence people are in crisis, simply suffering, everyone is desperate and frustrated."
Some foreign nationals have been evacuated, including 14 Israelis by military helicopter on Monday and five the day before via an NGO convoy.
QUOTE (former Mekelle resident now in Addis Ababa, to BBC Tigrinya): "I boarded public transport from Addis Ababa to Adama and tried to pay using a mobile transfer, but it didn't work... It has created havoc for many people like me who escaped the situation in Tigray. Many Tigrayans are now in trouble."
The Tigray Broadcasting Service, based in Addis Ababa, has started collecting video messages via Telegram from people outside the region and airing them by satellite TV to reconnect families cut off by the telecoms shutdown.
