URL: https://www.theguardian.com/society/2026/sep/26/severely-disabled-young-people-fast-track-benefits-milburn
The Guardian (Patrick Butler, Will Parman) — published Sat 26 Sep 2026, 10:00 BST (09:00 GMT)

HEADLINE: Severely disabled young people should get fast-track access to benefits, Milburn says
Standfirst: Alan Milburn said 16- to 24-year-olds with most complex needs should not have to keep proving they cannot work

Young people whose complex disabilities mean they have little prospect of paid work should get fast-track access to disability benefits, an official review of youth employment will say. The review, by former Labour health secretary Alan Milburn, will say 16- to 24-year-olds with the most severe lifelong needs should be guaranteed swift and unconditional benefit support rather than having to prove they cannot work.

Currently many disabled young people and their families endure repeated lengthy, adversarial and often distressing assessments to access personal independence payment (Pip) and universal credit health benefits. The guarantee could include young people with profound and multiple learning disabilities, severe neurological conditions, and those with severe and complex needs who qualify for NHS continuing healthcare support.

The review is expected in October. It will say there is no need for repeated disability benefits assessments for this group.

QUOTE (Alan Milburn, to the Guardian): "I've heard too many stories of young people with the most severe disabilities left waiting, worrying and fighting for the support they're entitled to. Too often they're having to battle through dehumanising tick-box assessments designed to catch people out, not care for them."
QUOTE (Milburn): "A different approach is needed for disabled people whose condition is so severe that they could never work. By right they should get faster support rather than having to prove it over and over again to get the help they deserve."

The separate government-commissioned Timms review into Pip concluded in an interim report earlier this year that the Pip assessment process was justifiably regarded by many claimants as "soul-destroying" and degrading.

QUOTE (Harriet Edwards, director of influencing at the charity Sense): "It would be a significant step forward for young disabled people with the most complex needs and their families, and for those who have long campaigned to end the exhausting and humiliating process of multiple assessments." / "But we must not write young disabled people off. Those who want to and are able to work need specialist employment support and genuine opportunities, alongside the financial protection they need to live their lives." / "Government must now take this recommendation forward. The detail will be crucial, including who is eligible, whether exemptions go far enough, and how this will work across different disability benefits so people aren't left navigating different rules and assessments."

Case study: Tara Harris, 57, from the West Midlands, described obtaining disability benefits for her son Ollie, 25, as a "bureaucratic nightmare" involving "constant battles of chasing things and not having things. It's 'computer says no.'"

The government commissioned Milburn to address a youth jobs crisis in which nearly 1 million 16- to 24-year-olds are classified as Neet (not in employment, education or training). His interim report, published in June, said young people with lifelong complex needs who will never be able to work must be protected by the benefit system, but hinted that young people with less severe conditions who could be supported to work may see reductions in benefits.
