URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/iran-awaits-us-move-after-wsj-report-says-trump-rejects-peace-plan-2026-09-26/
Reuters — first published 02:59 BST 26 Sep 2026, recast with Trump's comments, updated 16:15 BST 26 Sep 2026
HEADLINE (og:title): Trump rejects Iranian proposal to open Hormuz and end fighting
Byline: Menna AlaaElDin (Cairo), Parisa Hafezi (United Nations), Steve Holland (Washington); writing Daniel Trotta, Stephen Coates, Timothy Heritage; editing William Mallard, Gareth Jones
Note: "Recasts with Trump's comments, paragraphs 1, 3-5"

SUMMARY BULLETS:
- Trump says he has rejected Iranian proposal to end the war
- Iranian proposal would reopen strait, end fighting in 7 days
- Trump says Iran wants urgently to reopen strait due to economic woes
- Saudi allies show support amid continued attacks by Houthis

WASHINGTON/UNITED NATIONS/CAIRO, Sept 26 (Reuters) - US President Donald Trump said on Saturday he had rejected an Iranian proposal to reopen the Strait of Hormuz and end fighting in the Middle East.

Iran raised the initiative at the UN General Assembly in New York, saying it had been transmitted to the Americans via Qatari mediators and that it could reopen the strategic waterway and put an end to hostilities in the region within seven days.

QUOTE (Trump, to reporters at the White House): "I reject their proposal. ... I rejected their deal."
QUOTE (Trump, before leaving for Tennessee): "They want to make a deal to open the Hormuz Strait immediately because they're losing so badly. We're winning tremendously."
QUOTE (Trump): "They want to make a deal and I think that's fine, I like making a deal too. What they want to do is immediately open the Hormuz Strait ... because they have no money coming in, because they get their money from the Hormuz Strait."

The US has imposed an economic blockade on Iran to put pressure on Tehran to lift its blockade of Hormuz, which has drastically reduced shipping through the strait, even though Trump again asserted that the US had control of the waterway.

The Wall Street Journal first reported that Trump had rejected the Iranian proposal, citing unnamed US officials. It said Trump was privately sceptical that Iran would meet his demands and had told his staff that he sees a renewed bombing campaign as likely after the November US midterm elections to Congress.

A US official had said earlier that discussions with Iran through mediators were "positive and constructive".

CONFLICT HAS DISRUPTED OIL FLOWS, HARMED GLOBAL ECONOMY
The Iranians also engaged their Saudi rivals regarding the Strait of Hormuz, underscoring the stakes of a seven-month-old conflict that has disrupted oil flows through a critical shipping lane and taken a toll on the global economy.

Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araqchi told reporters at the United Nations on Friday the proposed deal would trigger a seven-day countdown to reopening the strait and a pause in regional fighting.
QUOTE (Araqchi): "If there is seriousness on the US side to come to a deal and reopen the Strait of Hormuz, everything is now prepared." If the US were to agree, the warring parties could start wider talks "on mutually agreed subjects."

Trump has said Tehran must never acquire a nuclear bomb, while a senior Iranian official told Reuters that Iran would show NO FLEXIBILITY over its nuclear programme even if the US accepted its peace deal. Iran would grant no concessions over its rights, including enriching uranium or shipping its highly enriched uranium out of the country, the official said.
(Separate Reuters story: https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/iran-will-make-no-nuclear-concessions-iranian-official-says-2026-09-25/ )

Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian, in an interview with the CBS show "Face the Nation", said Tehran was ready for talks on its nuclear programme and other issues, but would not accept "bullying or coercion".
QUOTE (Pezeshkian): "Iran is not seeking war, but will defend itself against pressure, threats and attacks" — adding that it had already agreed that "we're not supposed to develop nuclear weapons".

Previous attempts at diplomacy have failed to end the war, which began on February 28 with US and Israeli attacks. Since then the war has alternated between pauses and renewed strikes, killing thousands while degrading Iran's conventional forces and damaging Iran's already ailing economy.

Iran and its allies have retaliated by extending the conflict throughout the region. Iran has struck US allies in the Gulf with drones and missiles while its Houthi allies in Yemen have targeted Saudi interests.

PHOTO CAPTION (Reuters, 25 Sep 2026): Turkish Chief of General Staff General Selcuk Bayraktaroglu meets with Saudi Arabia's Chief of General Staff General Fayyadh bin Hamed Al-Ruwaili and Pakistan's Chief of Defence Forces and Chief of Army Staff Field Marshal Asim Munir in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, September 25, 2026.

OTHER REUTERS HEADLINES SAME DAY (from sidebar, with times EDT):
- "Trump says he spoke with Venezuela's Rodriguez about elections" 10:53 AM EDT https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/trump-says-he-spoke-with-venezuelas-rodriguez-about-elections-2026-09-26/
- "Trump predicts Cuba and US will make a deal" 10:39 AM EDT https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/trump-predicts-cuba-us-will-make-deal-2026-09-26/
- "China pushes back against US on Iran and Cuba in UN speech" 10:18 AM EDT https://www.reuters.com/world/china/china-pushes-back-against-us-iran-cuba-un-speech-2026-09-26/
- "German minister calls for expedited deportation in mass border crossings" 10:06 AM EDT https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/german-minister-calls-expedited-deportation-mass-border-crossings-2026-09-26/
- "Six big takeaways from a turbulent week of UN diplomacy" https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/six-big-takeaways-turbulent-week-un-diplomacy-2026-09-26/
