URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/ck9dww05y4p6o
BBC News (BBC Hampshire & Isle of Wight) — published Sat 26 Sep 2026, 10:35 BST (09:35 GMT)

HEADLINE: Memorial for pupils contaminated with HIV and hepatitis

A memorial has been created at Lord Mayor Treloar School and College, near Alton, Hampshire, where boys were experimented on and infected with HIV and hepatitis. During the 1970s and 1980s the school offered specialist care for children with haemophilia but pupils received medical treatments using contaminated blood products.

Of the 122 pupils with haemophilia who attended the school, only about 30 were still alive when the Infected Blood Public Inquiry published its report in 2024. The inquiry highlighted that "very few" of the pupils with haemophilia who attended between 1970 and 1987 "escaped being infected". It said children were treated as "objects for research" and were experimented on without their knowledge by NHS clinicians, who knew the dangers it posed.

The bronze memorial, sculpted by Tom Murphy, depicts two pupils, one with a sling and another holding a cane, embracing. The plaque reads: "Remembering 122 haemophiliac pupils of Treloar's. Infected as children, victims of unethical research. 'This disaster was not an accident.' Sir Brian Langstaff 20.05.24."

Survivors Richard Warwick, Adrian Goodyear, Steve Nicholls and Gary Webster attended the unveiling.

QUOTE (Adrian Goodyear, 55, survivor): "We couldn't believe the place we were looking at. Rolling country hills, swimming pools, canoes, a Jacobian mansion. It was just remarkable at first. We left school with death sentences."
QUOTE (Goodyear): "In 1985, a doctor tearfully said that I had two to three years to live. I was told this with five other boys and the doctor went round the room and said: 'You have... you haven't... you have... you haven't... you have got HIV'."
QUOTE (Goodyear): "When we were here we made promises... they died in front of us, one winter we lost five boys. I made promises to them, as did the other lads here today, that we would never give up. We would find out what happened."
QUOTE (Steve Nicholls, 59): the memorial "represents me 50 years ago, it represents the boys 50 years ago, it's what we were". "We feel incredibly guilty for surviving it and getting through it when many of our friends didn't."
QUOTE (Richard Warwick): the memorial was a "symbol of comradeship, friendship and support".
QUOTE (Martin Ingram, CEO of the Treloar Trust): "We have been pleased to support our former students to deliver a public memorial dedicated to former Treloar pupils and have provided land, logistical and financial support to ensure that all those impacted at Treloar's are remembered."
QUOTE (Rachel Halford, chief executive of the Hepatitis C Trust): the government should "reconsider why they have set such a pitifully low sum of £60,000 to compensate them for the unethical research undertaken on them".
QUOTE (Government spokesperson): "Victims of the infected blood scandal have suffered a terrible injustice and we remain committed to ensuring they receive the support and compensation they deserve. This payment is only part of a wider comprehensive compensation package that an eligible person would be entitled to. The government has listened and learned through engagement with the community to make changes to the compensation scheme to ensure the community receive the compensation they deserve."

The BBC understands the government has paid more than £1.4bn in interim compensation payments, while the Infected Blood Compensation Authority has paid more than £2.2bn.
Sir Brian Langstaff's report said the research at Treloar's was carried out "to an extent which appears unparalleled elsewhere" and had "left long scars, not only in this Hampshire community but across the UK". Former pupils have sought legal action against the school's trust in the High Court.
