URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/crx2zz401935o
BBC News (Marc Ashdown, Business correspondent) — published Sat 26 Sep 2026, 15:03 BST (14:03 GMT)

HEADLINE: Heathrow Airport warns third runway could be delayed by four years

Heathrow Airport has warned that its planned third runway might be delayed by four years due to planning and regulatory issues. The government had hoped the new runway at the UK's busiest airport, estimated to cost £49bn, would open by 2035. Heathrow sees this deadline as increasingly difficult to deliver without further steps to simplify the planning process. It said on Saturday it hoped to secure planning permission by 2029 and then open the runway "within a decade".

The Department for Transport said the project's timeline had "always been ambitious" and that it would continue to work with stakeholders "at pace".

The airport said its "core scenario" had always been to open a new runway within a decade of securing planning permission. It said it was encouraged by the chancellor's efforts to streamline infrastructure and remove policy and regulatory bottlenecks.

Former chancellor Rachel Reeves announced the government's support for the project in January 2025, and Prime Minister Andy Burnham - who was previously critical - said he was "open-minded" about the scheme when he came to office.

The project is expected to create around 100,000 jobs. The expansion would mean demolishing hundreds of homes, diverting rivers, and rerouting the M25 motorway between junctions 14 and 15 through a tunnel under the new runway. The number of flights from the airport, currently capped at 480,000 a year, could go up to 720,000 - or nearly 2,000 a day on average.

London Mayor Sadiq Khan has always opposed the project, warning of the impact on noise, air pollution and climate change.

A draft of the planning framework for the expansion was published in June this year for consultation. Once finalised, it then needs to be put to a parliamentary vote, which could reportedly be delayed until 2027.

Heathrow is the UK's busiest airport, serving more than 80 million travellers a year with four passenger terminals and two runways.

QUOTE (Heathrow spokesperson): "It's right that ambitious targets were set; the sooner expansion begins, the sooner the whole UK will benefit." Benefits would involve "at least 108,000 new jobs and billions of pounds invested in supply chains in every part of the country". "This is a national project, 100% privately financed which will support growth today and secure the UK's position in the global economy once the runway opens."
