URL: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/moscow-ukraine-russia-kyiv-zaporizhzhia-b3056827.html
The Independent (AP news wire) — published Saturday 26 September 2026 11:29 BST
(Same AP copy also on ABC News: https://abcnews.com/International/wireStory/7-dead-russia-ukraine-exchange-strikes-aerial-war-136777763 — 11:16 BST/6:29 AM ET)

HEADLINE: 7 dead as Russia, Ukraine exchange strikes and aerial war intensifies
SUBHEAD: Russian attacks have killed four people across Ukraine as the aerial war between Moscow and Kyiv intensifies

Russian attacks killed four people across Ukraine Saturday, officials said, as the aerial war between Moscow and Kyiv intensifies.

Russia has hammered Ukraine with cruise and ballistic missiles, powerful glide bombs and jet-powered drones while front-line progress has slowed, some 4.5 years after Moscow launched a full-scale invasion of its neighbour.

QUOTE (Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, written Saturday morning): "It is essential that our partners not forget: Russia is escalating every single day. If the Russians have chosen to make their strikes even more brutal, the world must choose stronger responses to keep the war from spreading further."

He listed "numerous strikes on residential homes" in the cities of Kyiv and Zaporizhzhia, and the Odesa, Sumy, and Kharkiv regions.

Two women in Zaporizhzhia died when they were trapped beneath the rubble of their destroyed home, Zaporizhzhia's regional military administration said. A separate Russian attack on the city of Sumy also killed two people, local officials said.

UKRAINIAN DRONES TARGET RUSSIAN REFINERIES
Zelenskyy appealed at the United Nations earlier this week to countries to starve Russia of revenue through sanctions and trade bans, denying Moscow the money it needs to prolong the war. But despite years of diplomatic efforts, there is no sign of a breakthrough in ending the war.

Ukraine's long-range drones have targeted Russian oil refineries and businesses. A Ukrainian drone attack on the southern Krasnodar region killed three people and wounded two, local officials said Saturday. Writing on Telegram, regional Gov. Veniamin Kondratyev said that a Ukrainian attack sparked fires at two industrial sites, but did not give further details. Russian media outlets later reported that a local oil refinery was targeted in the strike.

RUSSIAN ATTACKS SPARK FIRES IN KYIV
Elsewhere in Ukraine, two people were injured in the Kyiv region overnight after a Russian drone attack caused a fire at a warehouse in the Boryspil district. Russian drones also hit several districts in the Ukrainian capital itself, injuring four and damaging residential and office buildings, officials said.

Russia's Ministry of Defense said Saturday that its attack on Kyiv had damaged a data centre that supported both cellphone internet services and Starlink satellite communication systems.

TOTAL: 7 dead (4 in Ukraine — 2 women in Zaporizhzhia, 2 in Sumy; 3 in Russia's Krasnodar region).

NOTE ON DRONE NUMBERS (NOT from an approved source — DO NOT PUBLISH without approved confirmation): Ukraine's Air Force reported 173 attack and decoy drones launched from the evening of 25 Sep into the morning of 26 Sep, including Shahed-type attack drones, Gerbera UAVs and Parodiya decoys, with more than 50 of the Shahed-type drones jet-powered; 134 shot down or suppressed as of 07:30. Russia's Defence Ministry claimed it downed 645 Ukrainian drones over 13 regions. Sources: Kyiv Post, New Voice of Ukraine, Anadolu — none approved.
