URL: https://news.sky.com/story/infected-blood-scandal-memorial-to-haemophiliac-children-infected-from-experimental-treatments-13592005
Sky News — published Sat 26 Sep 2026, 12:30 BST

HEADLINE: Infected blood scandal: Memorial to haemophiliac children infected from experimental treatments

Boys infected with HIV and hepatitis after being experimented on with new haemophilia treatments have been recognised with a new memorial at their school, Lord Mayor's Treloar's College, a boarding school in Hampshire, where they were given experimental blood products in the 1970s and '80s.

Of the 122 pupils with haemophilia who went to the school between 1970 and 1987, only around 30 were still alive when the Infected Blood Public Inquiry published its main report in 2024. "Very few" of those pupils "escaped being infected", the report said. Treloar Boys had been treated as "objects of research" after being experimented on without their knowledge by NHS clinicians who knew the dangers.

A bronze statue of two boys, one with a sling and the other holding a cane, embracing, has been installed. Inscription: "Remembering 122 haemophiliac pupils of Treloar's. Infected as children, victims of unethical research" plus inquiry chair Sir Brian Langstaff's line: "This disaster was not an accident."

QUOTE (Adrian Goodyear, 55): when he first arrived it felt like a "new dawn", but he and other pupils "left school with death sentences". "In 1985, a doctor tearfully said that I had two to three years to live. I was told this with five other boys and the doctor went round the room and said: 'You have...you haven't...you have...you haven't...you have got HIV'. I'm the last remaining boy in that room."
QUOTE (Gary Webster, 61, who contracted HIV and hepatitis C): recalled being called to the doctor's office one dinner time as a child and told he had HIV "and had two years to live". More than 90 boys who were there have died, he said.
QUOTE (Steve Nicholls, 59): "My parents put their trust in the school and they were betrayed. We were subject of unethical research behind our parents' backs, it's as wrong then as it is today."
QUOTE (Richard Warwick): the memorial was a "symbol of comradeship, friendship and support".
QUOTE (Rachel Halford, chief executive of the Hepatitis C Trust): "Decades later, still no one has been prosecuted for what was done to the [Treloar's boys]. We urge their police reports to be dealt with thoroughly and urgently. And we urge the government to reconsider why they have set such a pitifully low sum of £60,000 to compensate them for the unethical research undertaken on them."

The inquiry concluded children at Treloar's were treated with multiple commercial concentrates known to carry higher risks of infection and staff favoured the "advancement of research" above the best interests of the children.
