URL: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/labour-party-andy-burnham-prime-minister-prime-liverpool-b3056853.html
The Independent (PA / David Hughes) — published Sat 26 Sep 2026, 15:57 BST (14:57 GMT/UTC)

HEADLINE: Andy Burnham pledges to set UK on 'new course' a decade on from Brexit vote

Andy Burnham promised to set the UK on a new course because the decade since the Brexit vote had resulted in "drift and division". The Prime Minister vowed to set out how he will deliver "good growth in every postcode, hope in every heart" as he arrived in Liverpool for his first Labour Party conference as leader.

QUOTE (Burnham): "We're going to make this a really important week where we set out a new direction for the country."
QUOTE (Burnham): "We've had a decade since Brexit and it's been a decade of too much drift, too much division, and we need to draw a line on that."
QUOTE (Burnham): his vision would leave "people able to have hope again that things will improve, that life will get better - and it will".
Dressed in black jeans, t-shirt and jacket, accompanied by his wife Marie-France van Heel.
QUOTE (Burnham): "I love coming to Liverpool on a Saturday, normally to support the Blues, but we're all supporting the Reds today, aren't we?"
QUOTE (Burnham): "And honestly, for me, it is a moment - a very proud one - as somebody born in this city, to walk up to my first Labour conference as leader of the Labour Party and Prime Minister. My granddad drove a lorry for Tate & Lyle up and down these docks - I wonder what he would make of this right now."

Labour party chair Bridget Phillipson said she was not complacent about winning the next election despite regained public favour in recent polling. She acknowledged Burnham's "real sense of connection" with the public was likely behind the latest polling, which showed Labour would be the largest party if a snap election were called, though it would fall short of a majority. MRP polling by YouGov also suggested Reform UK and the Tories would be neck-and-neck in parliamentary numbers, with neither able to form a government alone.

Burnham ruled out an early election as he took part in a marathon round of pre-conference broadcast interviews. He said he wanted to "knock dead" rumours of triggering a contest before 2029.

QUOTE (Bridget Phillipson, Labour chair, to PA): Labour had "a massive fight on our hands with Reform, with the Tories". She expressed caution about the polling "because the only poll that will matter is the one that happens on election day in 2029".
QUOTE (Phillipson): "But what we have seen with Andy Burnham is a real sense of connection with the public, taking things to the next level. That hope, that optimism, that sense that Britain's best days lie ahead of us."
QUOTE (Phillipson): "We've got a big fight on our hands come the next election, and I don't underestimate that challenge for one second, but there's a real sense of purpose and energy as conference gets under way."
QUOTE (Phillipson, on Starmer): "I'll be forever grateful to Keir for taking us to one of the best election results in our history, and over the last two years we've made huge strides forward, whether it's on better rights at work, on giving more protections for renters, and on tackling child poverty, and we are on course to lift the biggest number of children out of poverty in any parliament."
QUOTE (Phillipson): "That's why Andy Burnham this week will be setting out how we step up that change, how we demonstrate that people can feel better off, can see that sense of change within their communities."

Education Secretary Lucy Powell told the Guardian the Government under Starmer had "lost sight of some of the politics and the purpose".
QUOTE (Culture Secretary Lisa Nandy, speaking to the BBC on Saturday): "I think the reason, frankly, that we had a change of leadership at the start of this year is because we all felt that people need to feel the change in their lives that we promised in 2024 much more quickly."

Peter Kyle (former business secretary) warned Burnham was not doing enough to boost economic growth; told the BBC the Government needed more short-term decisions to boost growth, like slowing the rollout of new workers' rights. Angela Rayner used a pre-conference interview with the Times to hit out at Shabana Mahmood's plans to lengthen foreign social care workers' path to permanent settlement.
