URL: https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2026/sep/26/andy-burnham-tricky-labour-conference-budget-eu-oil
Guardian — published 2026-09-26T05:00:28Z = 06:00 BST Sat 26 Sep 2026. By Rowena Mason.

HEADLINE: The tricky tests awaiting Andy Burnham after Labour conference
Standfirst: From a difficult economic landscape to decisions on oil and gas drilling, welfare spending and the Chagos Islands, we look at what's on the horizon

Burnham "is riding high ahead of the Labour party conference after a successful first meeting with Donald Trump, and with his party faithful excited by their uplift in the polls." He makes his first speech as leader on Tuesday in Liverpool.

1. THE BUDGET — set for 28 October. "the global economic picture continues to look bad in the face of the Iran war pushing up energy prices and wider inflation." Chancellor John Healey "has little room for manoeuvre, with government debt interest payments rising and his headroom shrinking." Big spending decisions likely deferred to a bigger fiscal event in the spring. "The best they can manage might be targeted help on the cost of living for those struggling the most with energy bills."
   - KEY DATE: 25 November, when the energy regulator announces the next price cap for January; "there are warnings that prices could have to rise hugely in response to surging gas costs."
   - Government must decide whether to extend the freeze on FUEL DUTY, which is due to finish at the end of the year.
   - Some Labour MPs want big wealth taxes; Healey's hands are tied by the manifesto promise not to raise income tax, national insurance or VAT.

2. THE EU RESET — trying to break down more Brexit trade barriers. Sticking points include Brussels's "made in Europe" procurement policy. No fixed date for talks but movement expected this autumn, possibly in the first two weeks of November.

3. ZACK POLANSKI / HOLBORN AND ST PANCRAS BYELECTION — 8 October. Labour's candidate is council leader Sagal Abdi-Wali, against Green party leader Zack Polanski, who lives in north London. Seat is Starmer's former constituency.

4. OIL AND GAS DRILLING — Government "more open to allowing new oil and gas drilling under existing licences in the North Sea than the previous administration." Energy secretary Miatta Fahnbulleh "looked set to approve the Jackdaw field and later Rosebank, but these decisions have been delayed - some would say so as not to cause a row at Labour conference or ahead of the Holborn byelection." Cop31 climate conference in Turkey in November.

5. DISABILITY BENEFITS / WELFARE — Starmer was forced by backbenchers to retreat from £35bn in disability benefit cuts. This autumn a review by minister Stephen Timms concluded personal independence payment (Pip) "was not fit for purpose"; Alan Milburn, adviser on health, conducted a review on getting young people off benefits and into work. Burnham has signalled he is prepared to look at changes but in a "Labour way" aimed at helping people into work rather than making savings.

6. PUBLIC CONTROL OF SERVICES — Decision needed soon on Thames Water, "which is due to run out of money this autumn." Full nationalisation could be expensive, especially if creditors challenge terms of administration. The company has debts of £20bn and "is now in effect being controlled by a group of 100 hedge funds and distressed-debt investors."

7. CHAGOS — Burnham sat next to Trump as the US president "laid into the deal to give up sovereignty of the Chagos Islands to Mauritius, claiming it was a disastrous idea to lose control of a strategically important military base. The US president suggested the UK would reconsider its agreement to relinquish and lease back the base, and Burnham did not demur." Leaves the UK having to renegotiate or scrap a draft deal agreed by Starmer.

8. SMALL BOATS AND MIGRATION — "Burnham now has a wealth of data to show small boat arrivals and migration overall is reducing." Home secretary Shabana Mahmood is "set to finalise her package of changes to settled status very soon": making migrants wait longer before being eligible for settled status (which allows them to claim benefits and access NHS services). "The most difficult element is that she wants to apply these changes to people who are already in the country, alongside a series of other changes to the migration system, including forcibly deporting families who refuse to comply with removal orders." Mahmood has been consulting and some proposals may be watered down.
