URL: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/ukraine-russia-war-live-putin-trump-zelensky-nato-drones-b3056139.html
The Independent (live blog) — page updated 07:00 BST Saturday 26 September 2026; individual entries timestamped below

Headline: Ukraine-Russia war latest: Putin claims peace is 'on the table' - yet warns of further strikes

TOP LINE
Russian president Vladimir Putin has said all proposals for a settlement to the war in Ukraine remain "on the table," but has warned Kyiv to prepare for a sustained wave of retaliatory strikes.

Addressing journalists in St. Petersburg on Friday, the Russian leader claimed Moscow was ready to resume peace negotiations after his party secured a record supermajority in Russia's parliamentary elections this week.

However, Putin accused Ukrainian forces of intentionally derailing potential diplomatic channels with long-range drone strikes on polling stations during the voting period.

Dismissing Kyiv's recent military operations, Putin said: "They are the ones who started it... Everywhere, on every front. Are these playthings, child's play?

"[Ukraine] should therefore be made to feel Russia's retaliatory strikes and understand that no provocative actions ... will work. They're only making things worse for themselves."

While insisting that ceasefire frameworks and diplomatic solutions remain possible, Putin stressed that Moscow will first carefully assess what best serves its own national interests before agreeing to any terms.

--- LIVE BLOG ENTRIES (times as posted, BST) ---

07:00 BST 26 September 2026 — Little movement on Ukraine peace after turbulent week of UN diplomacy (Adam Withnall)
The UN General Assembly concluded on Friday after a week of speeches, meetings and hallway diplomacy. While they reached no breakthroughs on the world's most intractable conflicts, talks on the Iran and Ukraine wars inched forward.
US secretary of state Marco Rubio held talks with Russia's foreign minister Sergei Lavrov, after which he said Ukraine and Russia had both voiced an interest in a limited ceasefire involving grain and energy-related targets.
Ukraine and its allies are racing to secure these limited agreements before winter, fearing renewed Russian strikes on power and heating facilities.
But hours after Rubio spoke on Wednesday, Lavrov addressed the Security Council meeting on Ukraine, showing no indication Russia was prepared to engage on any subject. "Europe, whatever it thinks, just wants to get a pause, and it wants to use it to pump the Kyiv regime with weapons," Lavrov said.

06:00 BST 26 September 2026 — UN refugee chief urges Security Council to do more to end wars (Adam Withnall)
The UN's refugee chief used his first speech at the Security Council yesterday to call for a renewed focus on ending conflicts and crises, so that more than 117 million people forced to flee their homes can return. Barham Salih told the Council's 15 members that they have "a unique responsibility to help make peace possible." He said the conflict started by Vladimir Putin's invasion in 2022 had displaced millions inside the country and sent millions more fleeing to other countries. "For the millions of people forced from their homes - and the millions more who should never have to flee - I urge you to use that responsibility," said Salih, the former president of Iraq (2018-2022).

05:00 BST 26 September 2026 — Drone hits Russia's Ilsky oil refinery (Alisha Rahaman Sarkar)
Ukrainian drones reportedly targeted the Ilsky oil refinery in Russia's Krasnodar Krai, causing a fire at the facility. Local governor Veniamin Kondratiev said that the Ukrainian drones targeted Seversky district, which houses one of the largest oil-processing facilities in southern Russia. The extent of the damage to the refinery and casualties were not immediately known.

04:28 BST 26 September 2026 — Homes for Ukraine funding cut warning (UK angle)
Planned government cuts to the Homes for Ukraine Scheme could "send the wrong message to Putin", a Conservative former defence secretary (Sir Grant Shapps) has warned. From 1 January, monthly "thank-you" payments for households hosting Ukrainian refugees drop from £350 to £100. Local authority funding falls from £5,900 per guest to £3,300 per arrival.

03:00 BST 26 September 2026 — Trump administration commits $400m Ukraine aid ahead of deadline (Joe Middleton)
The Trump administration has formally committed nearly all of the $400 million in military aid approved by Congress for Ukraine, meeting a September 30 expiration deadline. According to Reuters, $307 million of the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative (USAI) package has already been locked in under binding contracts, with the remaining $93 million expected to be approved before the end of the fiscal year. The move follows bipartisan criticism accusing the Pentagon of "slow-walking" the assistance. Deliveries include offensive weapons and armoured vehicle spare parts, though Patriot air defence missiles are excluded due to global supply shortages.

02:00 BST 26 September 2026 — Recap: Ukraine WILL receive Patriot licences, says Zelensky (Joe Middleton)
Volodymyr Zelensky said on Friday that Donald Trump had at last agreed to issue Ukraine with the licences to produce Patriot interceptor missiles in house. "There are concrete agreements regarding Patriot licenses," the Ukrainian president said. "At our meeting, President Trump stressed that he had made his final decision: Ukraine will receive licenses to produce Patriot missiles."

01:00 BST 26 September 2026 — Zelensky urges Trump to enlist Beijing's help as US proposes trilateral UAE talks (Joe Middleton)
Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky has confirmed that he asked Donald Trump to use Beijing's influence over Moscow to help end the conflict. The US has said that Washington has proposed holding preliminary technical-level trilateral talks between US, Ukrainian, and Russian delegations in the United Arab Emirates.

00:00 BST 26 September 2026 — Putin accuses Baltic states of violating Russian-speakers' rights (Suha Kidwai)
Putin said Moscow is fully aware that the rights of Russian-speaking populations are being violated in the Baltic states, but maintains that Russia is responding solely within the "humanitarian sphere". Speaking to state media following the release of Russia's parliamentary election results, Putin criticised policies targeting ethnic Russians in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. Officials in Riga, Tallinn, and Vilnius have consistently rejected Moscow's allegations of discrimination.

23:00 BST 25 September 2026 — Russian election monitor arrested in Moscow on drug charges (Suha Kidwai)
Independent Russian election monitor Alexander Kynev has been arrested in Moscow after a district court ordered his arrest on large-scale drug trafficking charges. Kynev, who faces up to 20 years in prison if convicted, denies all allegations. Moscow's Perovsky District Court remanded the analyst in custody on Friday as official results from Russia's parliamentary election were finalised. A former professor at Moscow's Higher School of Economics and former head of analytics for the election monitoring group Golos, Kynev was designated a "foreign agent" in February and described the election as "the most unfair and tightly regulated" in modern Russian history.
