URL: https://news.sky.com/story/thursdays-newspaper-front-pages-12427754
Sky News — "Saturday's newspaper front pages", Saturday 26 September 2026 00:24 BST (live blog entries timestamped Friday evening BST).

SATURDAY 26 SEPTEMBER 2026 FRONT PAGES (as summarised by Sky News):

23:17 — THE GUARDIAN: "The Premier League is in turmoil after Manchester City were reportedly found guilty of breaking financial rules."
22:18 — DAILY EXPRESS: "Andy Burnham has been accused of gaslighting the nation after 'blaming Brexit for the small boats crisis'. It says the prime minister claimed a 'loss of collaboration' with other countries had made it harder to stop the crossings."
22:15 — THE TIMES: "Angela Rayner has told The Times she disagrees with the home secretary's plan to make it harder for foreign care workers to get permanent residency in the UK."
22:03 — THE DAILY TELEGRAPH: "family and friends of explorer Sir Ranulph Fiennes want an urgent investigation into his care amid claims he's been 'isolated' and moved between a succession of care homes in recent years."
21:51 — FT WEEKEND: "The Premier League has found Manchester City guilty of most of the financial charges levelled against it... The club was accused of breaking the rules to get around spending limits - but it denies the charges and reportedly plans to appeal."
21:45 — i WEEKEND: Manchester City could face relegation, a points deduction or fines.
21:42 — THE SUN: Manchester City could face a "massive points deduction" after reportedly being found guilty of more than 100 financial rule breaches between 2009 and 2018.
21:39 — DAILY STAR: fans of rival clubs calling for Manchester City to be kicked out of the top flight.
21:38 — DAILY MIRROR: "police are looking again at CCTV that could identify the killer of TV presenter Jill Dando."

NOTE: The Wrap panel was former chancellor Kwasi Kwarteng and investigative journalist Susie Boniface.
SUMMARY: The Saturday front pages are dominated by the Manchester City financial-rules verdict (Guardian, FT Weekend, i, Sun, Star). The only lead-tier UK POLITICS front page is The Times on Angela Rayner splitting from the home secretary over care workers' residency rights.
