URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/ck5yw8npxzrlo
TITLE: Lithuania has evacuation plans in face of Russia threats, PM says
PUBLISHED: 2026-09-22T01:04:16.422Z
FETCHED: 2026-09-22 (curl, full article)

Skip to content   Site search HomeNews SportBusiness Technology HealthCulture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live WeatherNewslettersLithuania ready to 'fight back' but has evacuation plans in face of Russia threats, PM tells BBC

Lithuania's prime minister has told the BBC his country has made evacuation plans in the face of threats from Russia, but added they "will not surrender" if attacked.

Prime Minister Mindaugas Sinkevičius told Newsnight that Lithuanians feel "constantly threatened" by Russia, in part because of drones entering the nation's airspace.

He told Newsnight if his country was attacked, "we will fight back... we will engage". But he said there were plans for a "variety of scenarios" and used an example of getting elderly citizens out of cities "smoothly" and avoiding traffic jams.

Lithuania, a Nato member, shares a land border with the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad.

"We're thinking about a variety of scenarios, not all of them are being discussed very much publicly," Sinkevičius told the BBC.

"We face concrete threats, not on a daily basis, but we're experiencing them and it's a true reality for us."

Sinkevičius also said the UK needed a "shift in the mindset" in terms of its approach to defence, but noted that Lithuania was "closer to the border and closer to [the] threat".

It comes just a week after Nato fighter pilots shot down a drone that entered Lithuania's airspace.

Though the origins of the drone have not been confirmed, Lithuanian Defence Minister Robertas Kaunas told Newshour that it came from the direction of Belarus, Lithuania's neighbour and a key Russian ally.

The UK's Defence Secretary Wes Streeting said: "Thanks to the swift and professional actions of Lithuanian and Italian forces, Nato once again demonstrated our readiness to protect our airspace.

"We stand united, around the clock, in defence of every inch of Nato territory."

Military drone incursions have become increasingly common across Europe since the beginning of Russia's full-scale of invasion of Ukraine.

Residents in Lithuania's capital Vilnius were also forced to take shelter in May after a drone alert was triggered, briefly grounding flights and rail travel.

Nato jets have scrambled multiple times to shoot down stray Ukrainian drones that have crossed into fellow Baltic countries Estonia and Latvia this year.

Ukraine has blamed the stray drones on Russian electronic warfare, technology designed to change the flight paths of Ukrainian drones.

Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia all joined Nato in 2004, becoming signatories to the Article 5 provision that states "an armed attack against one NATO member shall be considered an attack against all members".

War may be coming. Are we psychologically ready?

Watch: Ukraine's race to counter a new type of Russian drone

'No surprises' as results emerge in Russian parliamentary election

Russia's elections had few surprises - but how the Kremlin uses the results will be crucial

Burnham hails Greenland deal ahead of expected first Trump meeting

While Burnham praised the agreement, Lib Dem leader Ed Davey called it a "pretend" victory for Trump.

'There wasn't an hour when we didn't come under attack' - MP reflects on trip to Ukraine

Shropshire MP Stuart Anderson says 60 missiles and drones struck Kyiv in one afternoon during his trip.

Nato jets fly in for major defence exercise

The UK, Germany, Italy and US are taking part in combat training at RAF Waddington, Lincolnshire.

Denmark says Russian warship fired flares at military helicopter

The Danish prime minister has accused Russia of "reckless" behaviour, while the Kremlin is yet to comment.

Nato jets down drone that entered Lithuanian airspace

The origin of the drone is currently unknown, but authorities say it likely entered Lithuania from neighbouring Belarus, an ally of Russia.
