URL: https://www.irishtimes.com/world/2026/09/22/anything-could-happen-with-me-trump-cant-decide-on-his-iran-strategy/
TITLE: ‘Anything could happen with me’: Trump can’t decide on his Iran strategy – The Irish Times
PUBLISHED: 2026-09-22T05:32:46.658Z
FETCHED: 2026-09-22 (curl, full article)

‘Anything could happen with me’: Trump can’t decide on his Iran strategy – The Irish Times                 Subscriber OnlyGlobal BriefingNewsletter‘Anything could happen with me’: Trump can’t decide on his Iran strategy

Trump has left open the possibility of meeting Iran’s president Masoud Pezeshkian in New York this week

Denis Staunton's guide to understanding world events - what’s happening, why it matters and how it affects you

Donald Trump can’t decide whether to negotiate with the Iranians or to “go in and annihilate them”. But Tehran has its own conditions for going back into talks.

At the United Nations in New York on Tuesday, Donald Trump will meet leaders from Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain, Kuwait and Oman to talk about the next phase of the war against Iran. But he has also left open the possibility of meeting Iran’s president Masoud Pezeshkian, who will be in New York for the UN general assembly this week.

The Trump administration, which denied visas to Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas and his officials to come to New York for the general assembly, has allowed a small Iranian delegation to attend.

Last week, Trump said he was approaching a critical juncture in the war. “I have a big decision coming up. Do I want to go in and annihilate them or do I not? It’s a big decision. Anything could happen with me,” he told Axios.

Welcome to the new Global Briefing newsletter

Donald Trump and the media he loves to loathe are now in a shared nightmare

‘Berlin’s Mamdani’ could carry Left party to power in Berlin

The affluent English village that declared independence to stop an asylum centre

Qatar has been shuttling between American and Iranian negotiators for the past two weeks, sharing proposals to resume the negotiations that broke down in July. Tehran on Sunday set out seven conditions for resuming talks, warning that if Washington did not accept them, Iran was prepared for a decisive war.

The conditions include: a permanent end to all hostilities against Iran and its allies; lifting the naval blockade of Iran; unfreezing financial assets; withdrawal of all US combat forces deployed in the Gulf; compensation for war damage; restoration of Iran’s foreign and trade relations; and a jointly established mechanism to regulate shipping through the Strait of Hormuz.

Iran is demanding that the US demonstrates its good faith by implementing the Memorandum of Understanding the two sides agreed in Islamabad in June. But the negotiations collapsed because of conflicting interpretations of what the agreement said about Iran’s role in regulating shipping through the Strait of Hormuz.

Iran and Oman are close to agreement on an arrangement for managing shipping through the strait but it will require the endorsement of other Gulf states to be viable.

In the meantime, Washington is tightening the economic vice on Tehran, with treasury secretary Scott Bessent announcing this week that all Iranian airlines will be shut down from Wednesday.

Washington’s Gulf allies want to avoid an escalation of hostilities with Iran, and Saudi Arabia is hoping that Tehran will put pressure on the Houthi rebels to halt their offensive in Yemen if tensions ease. The Houthis have made dramatic advances this month to capture positions near the Bab al-Mandab Strait, a major choke point along the Red Sea.

Trump has rejected at least two appeals from Saudi crown prince Mohammad bin-Salman to join in the assault on the Houthis, and the New York Times reported that the president abruptly called off an attack on Sunday as bombs were being loaded on to US aircraft.

Although the Houthis have attacked Saudi ships in the Bab al-Mandab Strait, they have left other vessels largely undisturbed, and shipping through the strait is close to normal levels.

Please let me know what you think and send me your comments, thoughts or suggestions for topics you would like to see covered to denis.globalbriefing@irishtimes.com

German leaders prepare to deny far right access to secret war plan

Donald Trump and the media he loves to loathe are now in a shared nightmare

Zelenskiy to meet Trump at UN in push for energy truce with Russia

‘Anything could happen with me’: Trump can’t decide on his Iran strategy

Conor McGregor eyes extension to produce an almost 18,000sq ft home

Start-up ordered to pay €10,000 to worker sacked after complaining about failure to deduct tax

Christy Kinahan senior faces no cartel-related criminal charges

Working beyond retirement age: ‘I’ve seen some people who just kind of go downhill’

Drummer Seeks Musicians: the untold story of how Ireland’s biggest band was born

Stay on top of the latest news with our daily newsletters each morning, lunchtime and evening
