URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/sole-traders-and-landlords-earning-more-than-30000-urged-to-act-now
gov.uk: HMRC MTD 30k six months

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Navigation menu
      


      
                    Menu

        
          Menu
      
      
        


            
              
                Services and information
              
              
                    
                      Benefits
                      
                    
                    
                      Births, death, marriages and care
                      
                    
                    
                      Business and self-employed
                      
                    
                    
                      Childcare and parenting
                      
                    
                    
                      Citizenship and living in the UK
                      
                    
                    
                      Crime, justice and the law
                      
                    
                    
                      Disabled people
                      
                    
                    
                      Driving and transport
                      
                    
                    
                      Education and learning
                      
                    
                    
                      Employing people
                      
                    
                    
                      Environment and countryside
                      
                    
                    
                      Housing and local services
                      
                    
                    
                      Money and tax
                      
                    
                    
                      Passports, travel and living abroad
                      
                    
                    
                      Visas and immigration
                      
                    
                    
                      Working, jobs and pensions
                      
                    
              
            

            
              
                Government activity
              
              
                    
                      Departments
                      Departments, agencies and public bodies

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

Reports, analysis and official statistics

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

Sole traders and landlords earning over £30,000 urged to get ready for Making Tax Digital.

There are just six months to go until sole traders and landlords with a turnover of more than £30,000 will be required to use Making Tax Digital (MTD) for Income Tax.

HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC) is urging those customers to sign up on GOV.UK and start preparing now. They should check whether they meet the threshold, as turnover includes gross income from self-employment and property before any tax allowances or expenses are deducted.

Signing up early means customers can make sure their MTD details are correct from the start and have time to choose the software that works best for them. Agents can also sign up their clients via GOV.UK.

From 6 April 2027, around 1,077,000 more sole traders and landlords will need to create digital records and use compatible software to send HMRC quarterly updates of their income and expenses and to complete their tax return, in addition to those already using the service.

The quarterly updates are not additional tax returns, but short summaries.

By creating digital records throughout the year, sole traders and landlords can save hours previously spent gathering information at tax return time, helping them spend more time focusing on their business and avoiding the last-minute rush every January.

Craig Ogilvie, HMRC’s Director of Making Tax Digital, said:

Hundreds of thousands of sole traders and landlords are already successfully using Making Tax Digital and now it’s time for the next group to get ready.

Signing up now means you can prepare and familiarise yourself with the process before it becomes mandatory next April.

This builds on the successful launch of MTD for Income Tax for sole traders and landlords earning more than £50,000, who have been using the service since April 2026. Their next milestone is the second quarterly update due on 7 November.

The threshold will decrease further to £20,000 from April 2028, bringing MTD for Income Tax to an even wider group of sole traders and landlords.

MTD for Income Tax became mandatory for sole traders and landlords earning more than £50,000 from 6 April 2026.

To sign up, customers must be registered for Self Assessment and have submitted a tax return in the last two years.

Quarterly updates need to be sent through HMRC-recognised software. A list of compatible software is available on GOV.UK.

There are certain exemptions from Making Tax Digital for Income Tax, including for those who are digitally excluded. Visit GOV.UK for details.

Customers can learn more about how Making Tax Digital for Income Tax works by watching HMRC’s customer journey video on YouTube.

The estimate that around 1,077,000 additional sole traders and landlords will be required to join Making Tax Digital for Income Tax from April 2027 is based on HMRC analysis of 2024 to 2025 Self Assessment returns.

The following links open in a new tab

Share on Facebook
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
        
          
            
                
                  
                
                      Share on X
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
    



          

          
                        



          
      

        
          
                      
  
      



      

    Explore the topic

  
        Income Tax
        Self Assessment

  






          
        
    
    
  


      
          

  

  
    
      
        Is this page useful?
        
          
            
              Maybe
          
          
            
              Yes this page is useful
          
          

            
              No this page is not useful
          
        
      
    

    
      Thank you for your feedback
    

    
      
        Report a problem with this page
    
  


  

  
    
      

      

      Help us improve GOV.UK
      Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
        Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript).