URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cj62yg157prxo
BBC pol 14:09

Artist 'taking legal advice' over Tories' use of Andy Burnham portrait

Bottles of water and sweets poking fun at Andy Burnham were handed out at the Conservative Party conference

A bottle with Bottler Burnham written on it under a cartoon image of the PM wearing glasses and Andy Panders' People Pleaser Pick N Mix

An artist has said he is taking legal advice after accusing the Conservative Party of copying his portrait of Andy Burnham at their party conference.

People attending the event in Birmingham have been handed water bottles featuring the image and labelled \"Bottler Burnham\" and \"0% strength\" and sweets labelled \"Andy Panders' People Pleaser Pick N Mix\".

Labour supporter Stanley Chow, who created the image for Burnham's 2021 mayoral campaign in Greater Manchester, has claimed the party did not ask for permission to use the image.

A Conservative Party spokeswoman said the bottles were not on sale and merely handed out to attending media in \"goody bags\".

Manchester illustrator Chow said: \"I was stunned and angry when I saw what they had done. It is childish from them. I am taking legal advice.

\"I'm very disappointed. It's frustrating that an institution like the Conservative Party has no idea that they are infringing copyright.\"

The original image of Andy Burnham was created by Chow in 2021

The artist claimed Reform UK had also infringed his copyright by using the image a few months ago in AI-generated social media campaign posts.

A Reform UK spokesman said at the time that it had \"removed the posts in good faith and without any admission of liability on our part\".

Chow said: \"I can't quite believe the Tories are resorting to this too.

\"Regardless of your political allegiance, what the Tories have done is still copyright infringement.

\"Ultimately, I want to raise awareness that you can't just take someone else's artwork and do what you want with it.

\"I want to show other artists that when this does happen, you can make a stand, especially in this day and age where artists are struggling, because of AI and the cost of living.\"

Chow's image of Burnham has been used extensively by the politician across a series of campaigns and was recently used by the now-PM when he stood for election in Makerfield in June.

Chow's image of Burnham was widely-used in the Makerfield by-election in June

Manchester United fan Chow is well-known for his portraits of famous faces and he has previously created images of footballers, including Wayne Rooney, Edgar Davids and Ronaldinho.

He has also exhibited a series of portraits of \"Great Northerners\", which featured the likes of actress Maxine Peake, suffragette leader Emmeline Pankhurst and poet Lemn Sissay, and recently curated an art trail for the Brit Awards' arrival in his home city.

He has also drawn Eric Cantona and presented a picture of Sir Alex Ferguson to the former Red Devils manager.

Tell us which stories we should cover in Greater Manchester

Listen to the best of BBC Radio Manchester on Sounds and follow BBC Manchester on Facebook, X, and Instagram. You can also send story ideas via Whatsapp to 0808 100 2230.

Read our article on the job interview question you don't have to answer.

More on the situation in Spain.

More on Afghanistan's well issue.

Listen to The Martin Lewis Podcast on BBC Sounds.

Listen to Woman's Hour on BBC Sounds.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.