URL: https://www.npr.org/sections/world/
NPR world index late sweep

Accessibility links   
            Skip to main content
      Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
   


      
         


      
         



    
        
            
                
                    
                    Open Navigation Menu
                
            

            
                
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                    
                      
                        
                      
                      Newsletters
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                
                  
                
                NPR Shop
                
            

            
                
                
                  
                
                Get NPR+
                
            

            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                    Close Navigation Menu
                
            
            
                
                    
                      
                       
                      Home
                      
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          News
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for News
                        
                    

                    
                        National
                        World
                        Politics
                        Business
                        Health
                        Science
                        Climate
                        Race
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Culture
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Culture
                        
                    

                    
                        Books
                        Movies
                        Television
                        Pop Culture
                        Food
                        Art & Design 
                        Performing Arts
                        Life Kit
                        Gaming
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Music
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Music
                        
                    

                    
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    


                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Podcasts & Shows
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    

                    
                        Daily
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Morning Edition
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Saturday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Sunday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    All Things Considered
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Up First
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Here & Now
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    NPR Politics Podcast
                                
                            
                        
                        Featured

                        
    
        
        Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!
    

    
        
        Fresh Air
    

    
        
        Wild Card with Rachel Martin
    

    
        
        It's Been a Minute
    

    
        
        Embedded
    


                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Get NPR+
                                
                            

                            More Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Search
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Newsletters
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          NPR Shop
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                        Get NPR+
                        
                    
                
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                      
                    
                

                
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    

            
        
    
    
        
            
                About NPR
                Diversity
                Support
                Careers
                Press
                Ethics
            
        
    


      World News and International Headlines   NPR world news, international art and culture, world business and financial markets, world economy, and global trends in health, science and technology. Subscribe to the World Story of the Day podcast and RSS feed.


      
      
            
                  NPRWorld
         Many Stories, One World
      
      

   
   





      
            
                            IraqAfghanistan --> AsiaMiddle EastEuropeAfricaLatin America    
      
      

   

      
    
        
            
            
              
              Subscribe to NPR's Up First Email
            
        
    


      
            
    
        
    
            
                
                
                
            
    


    
        
            
                Ukrainian military medics treat a wounded Ukrainian soldier in the field hospital near the front line in the southeastern region of Zaporizhzhia on Sept. 12. The vast majority of casualties take place in the so-called kill zone, a band about 10 to 20 miles wide on both sides of the front line, which stretches more than 700 miles from north to south.
                
                    
                    Andriy Andriyenko/Ukrainian 65th Mechanized brigade/Ukrainian military via AP
                    
                
                hide caption

October 5, 2026 • The front line in the Russia-Ukraine war stretches more than 700 miles and has barely moved in four years. Yet straddling this line is the kill zone, dominated by constantly evolving drone technology.

October 5, 2026 • The FBI and U.S. prosecutors say Wanying Zhang, also know as Heather, surveilled the Taiwanese president's son and his family.

Supporters of imprisoned former Prime Minister Imran Khan's party prepare to march demanding Khan's release, in Lakki Marwat, a remote town in northwestern Pakistan, Sunday, Oct. 4, 2026.
                
                    
                    Maaz Awan/AP
                    
                
                hide caption

October 5, 2026 • Talks between Khan's party and the government failed two days ago. Besides Khan's release, protesters demand his transfer to a hospital and family visits.

Flowers adorn a garden in front of the U.S. Supreme Court building on March 31, 2026 in Washington, D.C.
                
                    
                    Roberto Schmidt/Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 5, 2026 • The Supreme Court is set to hear a blockbuster climate change case that could affect more than just climate issues. And, Brazil's presidential race is too close to call.

An Israeli airline El Al aircraft is parked on the tarmac at Ben Gurion Airport near the city of Lod on Friday.
                
                    
                    Jack Guez/AFP via Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 5, 2026 • The ongoing investigation has found the attacker intended to crash the plane into Israel's Ben Gurion International Airport, a person familiar with the matter but not authorized to speak publicly told NPR.

Karl Deisseroth, Peter Hegemann and Georg Nagel are shown on the screen as they are awarded the 2026 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, as announced during a press conference at the Nobel Forum at Karolinska Institutet in Stockholm, Sweden, Oct. 5, 2026.
                
                    
                    Pontus Lundahl/TT News Agency via AP
                    
                
                hide caption

October 5, 2026 • The Nobel Prize in medicine was awarded Monday to three scientists working on the mechanisms the brain uses to switch on, or off, the activity of individual nerve cells.

FILE - Britain's Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor, formerly known as Prince Andrew, looks round as he leaves after attending the Easter Matins Service at St. George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, England, April 20, 2025.
                
                    
                    Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP
                    
                
                hide caption

October 5, 2026 • A judicial spokesperson confirmed that Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor had filed a claim with the High Court in London and a hearing would take place Thursday.

People seen through a window inside a bar in La Cabrera, on the outskirts of Madrid, Spain, watch a televised speech by Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez from La Moncloa Palace announcing national elections, Monday, Oct. 5, 2026.
                
                    
                    Bernat Armangue/AP
                    
                
                hide caption

October 5, 2026 • Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez announced early elections Monday after his government suffered a bruising legislative defeat last week on emergency measures related to the country's housing crisis.

Brazil's President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (left) and presidential candidate Flávio Bolsonaro, right, face off in an Oct. 25 runoff after a tight first round.
                
                    
                    Mauro Pimentel, Sergio Lima/AFP via Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 4, 2026 • Now there are two: Brazil heads into a runoff after a first round that failed to fully energize voters, setting the stage for a more polarized contest that Washington is watching very closely.

U.S. MV-22 Osprey transport aircraft are parked at the U.S. Marine Corps Air Station Futenma in Ginowan, on the main island of the Okinawa archipelago, southern Japan, Tuesday, Feb. 18, 2025.
                
                    
                    Hiro Komae/AP
                    
                
                hide caption

October 4, 2026 • Japanese police arrested a U.S. Marine in the alleged robbery and murder of a woman on Okinawa, officials said Sunday.

AFP via Getty Images, Paula Bronstein for NPR and family photos/Collage by Mark Harris for NPR
        
    


    

    
        
                
                        Only on NPR
                

            She died covering war for Fox News. Her parents blame the network — and a star reporter
            
            
            October 4, 2026 • The family members of two Fox News journalists killed while covering the war in Ukraine are suing the network, saying it put getting the story ahead of its people.

Towels and caps for sale depicting Brazilian presidential candidates Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva and Flavio Bolsonaro are seen in a residential area of Brasília on September 11, 2026. Brazil will hold a presidential elections on October 4, 2026.
                
                    
                    Sergio Lima/AFP via Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 2, 2026 • Four years after President Lula narrowly defeated Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil is back at the ballot box. This time, Lula faces Bolsonaro's son, Flávio, in a high-stakes rematch.

The leading candidates in Brazil's election are incumbent President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (left) and his closest challenger Flávio Bolsonaro.
                
                    
                    Mauro Pimentel and Sergio Lima/AFP via Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 2, 2026 • Crime is at the top of voters’ concerns in Brazil heading  into Sunday’s national elections. Many are calling for tougher measures — part of a broader rightward shift across Latin America, where security has become a defining political issue.

German Chancellor and leader of Germany's center-right Christian Democratic Union Friedrich Merz leaves after a press conference one day after state elections in Berlin and Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, at the CDU's headquarters in Berlin on Sept. 21.
                
                    
                    JENS SCHLUETER/AFP via Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 2, 2026 • Centrist politicians are soul-searching after electoral gains by the far right and the far left. Today's weak coalitions, political fragmentation and dire economy echo a past that led to the rise of fascism.

In December, State Department senior official Jeremy Lewin welcomed Rwanda Foreign Minister Olivier J.P. Nduhungirehe for the signing of a multi-year Memorandum of Understanding on global health cooperation.
                
                    
                    U.S. Office of Foreign Assistance
                    
                
                hide caption

October 2, 2026 • The America First strategy asks for a Memorandum of Understanding as a condition for healthcare and development aid. It's been praised for promoting self-reliance but criticized for its conditions.

Much of the documentary NAZA is filmed on the rooftops of Tel Aviv, where Israeli journalist Yuval Abraham conducted one-on-one interviews with Israeli soldiers and intelligence personnel.
                
                    
                    The Guardian
                    
                
                hide caption

October 2, 2026 • NAZA is an acronym for nezek agavi, Hebrew for "collateral damage." It refers to the number of civilian casualties the Israeli military deems acceptable. The documentary is made by Israeli filmmakers.

New York State Attorney General Letitia James speaks during a press conference regarding legislation on artificial intelligence on Sept. 21, 2026, in New York City.
                
                    
                    Michael M. Santiago/Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 2, 2026 • New legal action in two closely watched cases: one at Cornell, the other over Renee Good's death. We take a closer look.

A national flag of Thailand flutters in the wind with the city skyline in the background in Bangkok on September 9, 2026.
                
                    
                    AMAURY PAUL/AFP via Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 2, 2026 • Activists across Asia are being hunted down by authoritarian governments even across international borders. Human rights groups have been warning of a "swap market" of repression in Southeast Asia.

George Major, known as the Pearly King of Peckham, wears his blinged-out suit in 2024. He died in August at age 88.
                
                    
                    Tony Kershaw/Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 1, 2026 • In mother-of-pearl suits, the Pearly Kings used to canvass East London for charity. The tradition of the Pearly Kings stretches back to the 1800s, when this area of the city was gritty and poor, and dressing up gave working-class people dignity. The most famous of the Pearly Kings, George Major, died in August at age 88. Major’s portrait still greets arrivals at Heathrow Airport, and he’s said to be the inspiration for an iconic character in a British sit-com.

October 1, 2026 • In mother-of-pearl suits, the Pearly Kings used to canvass East London for charity. The most famous one, George Major, died in August. A look back on this larger-than-life figure and the Pearly King tradition.

A plane carrying passengers from an earlier Flydubai flight that was diverted to Saudi Arabia arrives at Ben Gurion Airport on Sept. 30, 2026, in Tzafria, Israel.
                
                    
                    Erik Marmor/Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 1, 2026 • What we know so far about the tense moments aboard a Tel Aviv-bound flight. And, the FBI investigates a cyberattack involving sensitive employee data.

A street vendor sells campaign flags of presidential candidates Sen. Flávio Bolsonaro and current President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who is running for reelection in Brasilia, Brazil, Tuesday.
                
                    
                    Eraldo Peres/AP
                    
                
                hide caption

October 1, 2026 • President Lula promised Brazilians four years ago they'd be able to afford picanha again. Now, as he seeks another term, the price of the country's favorite cut of beef is telling a different story.

The International Criminal Court in The Hague on Sept. 23.
                
                    
                    Remko de Waal/ANP/AFP via Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

October 1, 2026 • Kimberly Prost, a Canadian judge at the International Criminal Court, says U.S. sanctions disrupted her daily life. She is still hearing cases and challenging the sanctions in court.

Iraqi security officers flash victory signs as they ride on vehicles decorated with national flags and ribbons during a convoy celebrating the complete withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq, in Baghdad, Wednesday.
                
                    
                    Hadi Mizban/AP
                    
                
                hide caption

September 30, 2026 • American forces made a formal exit from Iraq with a low-key ceremony. It marks the end of an era that began over 23 years ago with President George Bush’s “shock and awe” invasion. The U.S. military has actually been in Iraq for much of the last 35 years, and the country is still facing an uncertain future.