URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cwdr8j7vvp8do
BBC pol 19:21 BST

Conservatives pledge support for Heathrow third runway

Shadow chancellor Andrew Griffith said the third runway would mean \"cheaper flights, better connections and more exports of high value\"

A person wearing glasses, a suit and headphones speaks into a BBC Radio 4 Today microphone, with the programme logo on a screen behind.

The Conservatives have backed a third runway at Heathrow, despite some concerns raised by two candidates hoping to be the party's next mayor of London.

Shadow chancellor Andrew Griffith used his Conservative Party conference speech to pledge to end what the party called the \"embarrassment\" of the long-running dispute over expansion.

Griffith said: \"The next Conservative government will do whatever it takes to end the delays and boost capacity by backing the third runway. We are all in for growth and will legislate to sweep away the blockers.\"

Previously, Prime Minister Andy Burnham refused to say whether he backed a third runway, after it emerged the project could be delayed up to four years.

Sir James Cleverly MP said the decision would ultimately be made in Westminster

Speaking to BBC Radio 4 prior to the conference, he described Heathrow as a \"global hub airport\" and \"a big jumping off point for British exports\".

However, mayoral hopeful Sir James Cleverly MP said he had \"always been very sceptical\" about some of the \"quick fix arguments\" put forward by supporters of a third runway.

Cleverly said the decision would ultimately be made in Westminster rather than City Hall, adding that his priority as mayor would be to ensure \"the needs of Londoners are put forward first, particularly those in west London\".

He said he had secured a meeting with Heathrow Airport to discuss its plans and possible mitigations for people living nearby, and would also meet community groups opposed to expansion.

Andrew Boff, who currently chairs the London Assembly

Andrew Boff also criticised the proposal, describing it as \"the most unambitious scheme\".

Boff said: \"We want something that's going to solve the air travel problems of London for hundreds of years ahead, not just until the next crisis.\"

However, Alex Challoner and Festus Akinbusoye backed the plans.

Challoner said: \"I've been very clear about this. I am in support of London Heathrow Airport and I would welcome a third runway at Heathrow.\"

Akinbusoye added: \"My view in the past has always been let's focus on getting Gatwick increase in terms of capacity, same for City Airport, same for Stansted.

\"Well, this is a pragmatic position in terms of looking at the overall infrastructure issue that we have in the country and Heathrow is a very central part of the wider infrastructure network that we have in Britain.\"

Cleverly, Boff, Challoner and Akinbusoye all intend to run to be the Conservative candidate for mayor of London.

The current London mayor, Lord Sadiq Khan, has formally opposed plans for a third runway at Heathrow Airport

The Conservatives' backing for a third runway contrasts with Prime Minister Andy Burnham's more cautious approach to the project.

Griffith told the Tory conference in Birmingham: \"What used to be the world's busiest airport is no longer even Europe's. The Prime Minister says he wants growth in every postcode.

\"Well not the Heathrow postcode, apparently, that's not leadership. So let me be clear, the next Conservative government will do whatever it takes to end the delays and boost capacity by backing the third runway. \"

Speaking at the end of September, Burnham said the issue was \"principally\" a matter for London and Londoners, adding: \"I think we ought to hear the voice of people there first.\"

As mayor of Greater Manchester, Burnham opposed a third runway over concerns it would delay transport investment in the north, but said after becoming prime minister that he was \"open-minded\" about the scheme.

Former chancellor Rachel Reeves had backed the expansion as a way of boosting the economy, with the runway originally expected to open by 2035.

Heathrow has since indicated it may not be operational before 2039.

Listen to the best of BBC Radio London on Sounds and follow BBC London on Facebook, X and Instagram. Send your story ideas to hello.bbclondon@bbc.co.uk

Read our article on the job interview question you don't have to answer.

More on the situation in Spain.

More on Afghanistan's well issue.

Listen to The Martin Lewis Podcast on BBC Sounds.

Listen to Woman's Hour on BBC Sounds.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.