URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/domestic-abusers-to-be-marked-and-tracked-in-boost-to-victims-safety
gov.uk: DA court flags in force today

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Navigation menu
      


      
                    Menu

        
          Menu
      
      
        


            
              
                Services and information
              
              
                    
                      Benefits
                      
                    
                    
                      Births, death, marriages and care
                      
                    
                    
                      Business and self-employed
                      
                    
                    
                      Childcare and parenting
                      
                    
                    
                      Citizenship and living in the UK
                      
                    
                    
                      Crime, justice and the law
                      
                    
                    
                      Disabled people
                      
                    
                    
                      Driving and transport
                      
                    
                    
                      Education and learning
                      
                    
                    
                      Employing people
                      
                    
                    
                      Environment and countryside
                      
                    
                    
                      Housing and local services
                      
                    
                    
                      Money and tax
                      
                    
                    
                      Passports, travel and living abroad
                      
                    
                    
                      Visas and immigration
                      
                    
                    
                      Working, jobs and pensions
                      
                    
              
            

            
              
                Government activity
              
              
                    
                      Departments
                      Departments, agencies and public bodies

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

Reports, analysis and official statistics

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

Victims and survivors of domestic abuse will be better protected as new measures come into force today (Monday 5 October), which require courts to make a formal record when domestic abuse was a factor in offending.

Domestic abuse is already recognised as an aggravating factor in a wide range of offences, such as assault or stalking, but until now there has been no consistent way to record this once an offender is convicted. This makes it harder to identify abusers; manage the risks they pose and identify patterns of repeat offending.

Under the new measures, the courts must now state in open court when an offence involved domestic abuse, creating for the first time a single, clear court record that can be shared across the criminal justice system. This will ensure perpetrators are identified and managed more effectively by enabling more tailored interventions to address abusive behaviour.

Minister for Victims and Tackling Violence Against Women and Girls and International Justice, Alex Davies-Jones said:

Too many victims have suffered because patterns of abusive behaviour have not always been recognised across the justice system.

This is an important step towards better identifying dangerous perpetrators, protecting victims and delivering on our commitment to halve violence against women and girls.”

Andrea Simon, London’s Victims’ Commissioner, said:

As a panel member of the Independent Sentencing Review, I was committed to ensuring domestic abuse flags were enshrined in law through the Sentencing Act. This is so the context of an offence could be formally recorded and protections for victims of abuse could be strengthened. I am therefore, pleased to see these measures being implemented in practice. Within the context of early prison releases, it is vital that justice agencies can effectively identify and respond to the risks posed by domestic abuse perpetrators and put the right interventions in place to protect victims from further harm.

Court flags will be shared with relevant partners and agencies, and be visible on police, probation and prison digital systems. This will give frontline staff a clearer picture of an offender’s history, helping them assess and manage risk effectively and better identify repeat domestic abuse offenders

More widely, victims are being supported through a new Victim Support helpline, funded as part of an £18 million support package, while the Prime Minister has blocked offenders convicted of rape, serious child sexual offences and grooming from benefiting from upcoming sentencing changes.

Victims will also be better protected through the expansion of electronic monitoring, including world-first restriction zones designed to keep the highest-risk offenders away from those they have harmed.

Dame Nicole Jacobs, Domestic Abuse Commissioner, said:

This marks a step change in our ability to track domestic abuse perpetrators through the criminal justice system - something I have long called for.

Not only will it enable us to better identify and respond to harmful behaviour, but it will also help ensure victims receive the right level of support they need, while giving us a clearer picture of how pervasive domestic abuse is within our justice system.

That insight is crucial if we are to better protect victims and hold perpetrators to account.

The following links open in a new tab

Share on Facebook
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
        
          
            
                
                  
                
                      Share on X
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
    



          

          
                        



          
      

        
          
                      
  
      



      

    Explore the topic

  
        Courts, sentencing and tribunals
        Domestic abuse
        Violence against women and girls

  






          
        
    
    
  


      
          

  

  
    
      
        Is this page useful?
        
          
            
              Maybe
          
          
            
              Yes this page is useful
          
          

            
              No this page is not useful
          
        
      
    

    
      Thank you for your feedback
    

    
      
        Report a problem with this page
    
  


  

  
    
      

      

      Help us improve GOV.UK
      Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
        Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript).