URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c6kglm3381p1o
BBC: Don't axe Youth Parliament pleads teen member

'Don't axe Youth Parliament' pleads teen member

Aman Fatima has been a Member of Youth Parliament for two years

A head and shoulders image of a young woman wearing a purple blazer over a light blue shirt, gold hoop earrings and a headscarf.

A taxpayer-funded programme aimed at boosting young people's interest in politics should not be axed just because \"money is tight\", one of its members has said.

Last month the BBC learned the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) would not be committing to giving any more grants to the UK Youth Parliament.

\"If the government is to cut the Youth Parliament there should be reasons and there has to be alternatives, even if the funding is tight,\" Aman Fatima, MYP for Essex, told BBC Politics East.

The government said it was working on a new scheme to increase young people's involvement in democracy and decision-making, with further announcements due this autumn.

Established in 1999, the parliament takes place at the House of Commons and boasts more than 300 elected members aged between 11 and 18, including Aman.

She said if the scheme – run by the National Youth Agency – was scrapped, an alternative must be found because \"young people are the next generation\" of government.

\"Money is tight but you also want young people's opinions; them to tell you what's wrong and the challenges they are facing,\" she said.

\"And the [Youth Parliament] really helps young people get their voice out there, especially in a big place such as the House of Commons.\"

Members of the UK Youth Parliament, formed in 1999, hold an annual debate within in the House of Commons every year

As part of the programme, the young politicians are allowed to hold debates in the House of Commons chamber, on a day when MPs are not sitting, once a year.

In recent years, they have campaigned on issues such as votes for 16-year-olds and for free period products to be made available to students.

\"There are lots of opinions from people saying that they haven't seen any difference made, but I think we do contribute to how the government works today,\" added Aman.

In the last year, the youth parliament received £453,000 in taxpayer funding with about £2.4m public money spent on it between 2017 and 2024.

No final decision has been made on funding after March 2027, but a government source said Downing Street would no longer commit to it \"in its current form.\"

Labour MP Jess Asato believes there are other ways for young people to make their mark in politics

Jess Asato, Labour MP for Lowestoft, said she believed the decision had been made because the Youth Parliament was not producing \"a diversity of voices\".

\"I think what the government's trying to say is we need things much more locally that bring a lot more young people into that political or democratic engagement,\" she said.

\"In East Suffolk we have a fantastic youth council and that means lots and lots more young people can get involved in things that they care about locally.

\"But I do wish the government might look at this [decision] again.\"

Conservative MP Patrick Spencer said funding for Labour government's plans had to come from somewhere

Patrick Spencer, Conservative MP for Central Suffolk and North Ipswich, said: \"The reality is this government needs to make cuts because it needs to fund things that it's planning to do.

\"It's one of the difficult decisions that has got to be made.\"

The DCMS praised the youth parliament's \"important legacy\" and said it had given elected young people \"a national platform to represent their peers, engage with decision-makers and develop confidence, leadership and skills for life and work\".

Do you have a story suggestion for Essex? Contact us below.

Follow Essex news on BBC Sounds, Facebook, Instagram and X.

Listen to The Martin Lewis Podcast on BBC Sounds.

Listen to Woman's Hour on BBC Sounds.

Read our article on the job interview question you don't have to answer.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.