URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cvze4g06526ro
BBC: BT agrees rescue deal to buy TalkTalk

BT agrees rescue deal to buy broadband operator TalkTalk

TalkTalk logo on an office building

The UK's biggest broadband provider, BT, has agreed to rescue rival operator TalkTalk in a takeover.

The deal, which will need to be approved by the UK's competition regulator, would mark end of months of speculation over the future for TalkTalk, which has been on the brink of administration because of its debts.

TalkTalk has 1.5 million retail customers and one million wholesale customers across the UK. Some have raised concerns about the increased control BT will have over the broadband market as a result of the deal.

BT chief executive Alison Kirkby said the deal provided \"a safety net for the households and businesses who rely on TalkTalk\".

\"TalkTalk's customers will benefit from access to the UK's best network, and the full range of market-leading products and services that BT offers,\" she added.

BT said the deal would provide \"much needed and immediate reassurance\" for TalkTalk's employees as well as its UK customers - both retail and wholesale.

\"This includes vulnerable households, and connections that support critical national infrastructure providers across health, emergency services, defence, education, transport, banking and government.\"

Listen to The Martin Lewis Podcast on BBC Sounds.

Listen to Woman's Hour on BBC Sounds.

Read our article on the job interview question you don't have to answer.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.