URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cqm249v07j4xo
BBC: Ethiopian rebel forces withdraw from Tigray regional capital

Ethiopian rebel forces withdraw from Tigray regional capital

A pro-government soldier standing guard on a street in Ethiopia's Tigray region on Sunday

A member of the Ethiopian pro-government Tigray Peace Force (TPF) monitors activity on a street while holding a gun. He is in a camo jacket and trousers. A man wearing a white jumper and jeans walks behind him.

Rebel forces in Ethiopia's northern Tigray region have said they have temporarily withdrawn from the regional capital, Mekelle, as fighting with the national army moves towards the city.

The Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF), which has been running the region, said its decision to relocate was made because of concerns about risks to civilians.

Two residents in Mekelle told the BBC that pro-government forces now control the city and TPLF fighters have abandoned it. One resident also said mobile phone services appear to have resumed in parts of the city.

Fighting has erupted in recent weeks between the TPLF and allied groups and government forces in parts of the northern regions of Tigray, Afar and Amhara.

The development marks a major shift in the conflict and raises concerns among observers that the fighting could further destabilise the Horn of Africa, potentially drawing in neighbouring countries.

The US Department of State called for \"restraint\" and \"dialogue\" on all sides ahead of a diplomatic meeting about the conflict in Egypt on Sunday with leaders from some of Ethiopia's neighbours.

The presidents of Egypt, Eritrea, Somalia and Sudan - which all have strained relations with Ethiopia - met on Sunday in the Egyptian coastal city of El-Alamein.

They called for \"respecting the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of states\" and the resolution of disputes through \"peaceful means\".

Ethiopia accuses Egypt, Eritrea and Sudan of supporting the Tigray rebels, which they deny.

Tigray residents have been trying to recover from a devastating two-year civil war that ended in 2022 when the African Union (AU) brokered a peace deal, known as the Pretoria Agreement, between the two sides.

However, in the last six months there has been a worsening of relations, with both sides accusing each other of violating the agreement.

Last month, the TPLF joined six other armed movements, including the Fano militia from Amhara, to form an alliance whose stated objective is to remove Ethiopia's Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed's government from power.

The civil war was one of the most deadly conflicts this century - the AU's mediator estimated some 600,000 people died as the fighting drove the region to the precipice of famine.

On Friday, neighbours Ethiopia and Eritrea severed diplomatic relations with each other after Addis Ababa accused Asmara of supporting a new rebel alliance - an allegation that it denied.

Ethiopia has also accused Egypt of supporting the rebels, leading to the expulsion of an Egyptian diplomat, which Cairo responded to by ordering an Ethiopian embassy official to leave within the same period.

The United Nations has warned that the deteriorating security situation in northern Ethiopia is severely disrupting humanitarian work and has called on all sides to guarantee safe and unhindered access to people in need.

Ethiopia and Egypt have been embroiled in a longer dispute over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam built on the River Nile, which Cairo fears could reduce its share of water from the river.

On Sunday, the four leaders meeting in Egypt affirmed respect sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs of the regional states, while calling for adherence to international law over the usage of Nile waters.

In a joint statement, they rejected \"unilateral measures\" that could harm downstream countries, in an apparent reference to tensions over Ethiopia's dam.

Listen to The Martin Lewis Podcast on BBC Sounds.

Listen to Woman's Hour on BBC Sounds.

Read our article on the job interview question you don't have to answer.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.