URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cmrly809n8p6o
BBC: Protesters gather as migrants brought ashore

Protesters scuffle with police as migrants brought ashore on south coast

Police and demonstrators during the protest in Gosport on Sunday evening

There is a line of police to the right of the image, facing towards the left. They're wearing yellow hi-vis jackets and black and white hats. On the left of the image are a handful of men, one wrapped in a red and white flag

About 150 anti-migrant demonstrators gathered in a south coast town to stop a group of migrants, who had crossed the English Channel in a small boat, being brought ashore by the RNLI.

Some flares were set off and there were a few scuffles with police during the stand-off at a marina in Gosport that lasted into the early hours of Monday morning.

The Home Office said 149 migrants were picked up in a mid-Channel rescue operation by the RNLI alongside a French vessel.

They were taken by coach to a processing centre in Kent. It is the second known landing of large numbers of migrants this far west along the south coast in recent years.

A police cordon was in place on Haslar Road in Gosport, where the atmosphere at the protest mostly remained peaceful.

Some protesters stopped police vans from advancing by standing in front of them and chanting \"shame on you\" and \"deport the lot\".

Hampshire Police said it deployed officers to \"support our partners in the event of an emergency at sea\". The force imposed conditions under the Public Order Act as well as powers prohibiting the wearing of face coverings.

The migrants were brought into Gosport onboard an RNLI boat

Hampshire's Police and Crime Commissioner Donna Jones said she was \"calling on the Home Secretary to intervene urgently to ensure that UK Border Force has the capacity and vessels to transfer people on the water to Dover.

She said: \"No sites across the southern coastline of Britain should be used as 'landing sites'. We are not equipped and we do not have the resources to keep policing this.\"

Posting on social media, Jones added: \"Each protest is costing me £150,000 of taxpayers' money from my police budget which I can ill afford to spend.

\"That means there is less police officer time on the streets of Hampshire and the Isle of Wight - urgent action is needed.

A Home Office spokesperson refused to explain why Gosport had been chosen on this occasion, saying they do not comment on \"operational processes\".

\"The Border Security Command works around the clock to monitor the Channel and protect our border,\" they said.

They added it was \"vital we continue to detain, check and process every small boat arrival\".

The migrant dinghy appeared to have set off from near Utah Beach in Normandy on Sunday morning, according to ship tracking data.

It is the third crossing in a month. So far this year 19,451 people are recorded as having crossed the Channel in small boats.

That number is 43% lower than this time last year and 23% below the figure at this stage in 2024.

Last month, more than 100 migrants landed at Eastney in Portsmouth, leading to more scuffles between police and demonstrators.

The 51 migrants were were ultimately taken to Dover by sea.

Protesters gathered in Gosport on Sunday evening

Get our flagship newsletter with all the headlines you need to start the day. Sign up here.

Listen to The Martin Lewis Podcast on BBC Sounds.

Listen to Woman's Hour on BBC Sounds.

Read our article on the job interview question you don't have to answer.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.

Read our article: Mistakes to avoid when buying Glastonbury tickets.

Watch Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg on BBC iPlayer.

Made by BBC Ideas in partnership with University of Oxford

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

Listen to more from Radio 1 on BBC Sounds.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

Protests are continuing across France as students take to the streets to voice their anger over school conditions.

Demonstrations began in the capital Paris nearly two weeks ago and have now escalated and spread to other parts of the country.

More than 500 schools are facing disruption. At least 65 staff members have been injured in the unrest, the country's education ministry has said.

The BBC's James Waterhouse is in Paris and witnessed students throwing projectiles and police firing tear gas during clashes.

Follow live updates on this story.

Listen to the full Witness History episode Auschwitz: An SS officer's photo album, on BBC Sounds.

More on the pilot's conversation with the Indian PM.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.