URL: https://www.npr.org/2026/10/04/nx-s1-5981181/brazil-presidential-lula-bolsonaro
NPR: Brazil race heads to Lula-Bolsonaro run-off as right gains

Accessibility links   
            Skip to main content
      Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
   


      
         


      
         



    
        
            
                
                    
                    Open Navigation Menu
                
            

            
                
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                    
                      
                        
                      
                      Newsletters
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                
                  
                
                NPR Shop
                
            

            
                
                
                  
                
                Get NPR+
                
            

            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                    Close Navigation Menu
                
            
            
                
                    
                      
                       
                      Home
                      
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          News
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for News
                        
                    

                    
                        National
                        World
                        Politics
                        Business
                        Health
                        Science
                        Climate
                        Race
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Culture
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Culture
                        
                    

                    
                        Books
                        Movies
                        Television
                        Pop Culture
                        Food
                        Art & Design 
                        Performing Arts
                        Life Kit
                        Gaming
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Music
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Music
                        
                    

                    
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    


                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Podcasts & Shows
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    

                    
                        Daily
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Morning Edition
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Saturday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Sunday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    All Things Considered
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Up First
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Here & Now
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    NPR Politics Podcast
                                
                            
                        
                        Featured

                        
    
        
        Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!
    

    
        
        Fresh Air
    

    
        
        Wild Card with Rachel Martin
    

    
        
        It's Been a Minute
    

    
        
        Embedded
    


                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Get NPR+
                                
                            

                            More Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Search
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Newsletters
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          NPR Shop
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                        Get NPR+
                        
                    
                
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                      
                    
                

                
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    

            
        
    
    
        
            
                About NPR
                Diversity
                Support
                Careers
                Press
                Ethics
            
        
    


      Lula and Flávio Bolsonaro face off in Brazil run-off   Now there are two: Brazil heads into a runoff after a first round that failed to fully energize voters, setting the stage for a more polarized contest that Washington is watching very closely.


         

    
        The Americas
    


      Brazil's presidential race heads to Lula–Bolsonaro run-off as right gains ground
   
   
   




      
            
                  
    
            Updated October 4, 202610:25 PM ET

                
                    Originally published October 4, 20268:17 PM ET
                

                
    

      
      

   
   

   
            
                  
                        
                              By

Brazil's President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, left, and presidential candidate Flávio Bolsonaro, right, face off in an October 25 runoff after a tight first round.
                
                    
                    Mauro Pimentel, Sergio Lima/AFP via Getty Images
                    
                
                hide caption

RIO DE JANEIRO —Brazil's presidential race is heading to a runoff between left-wing President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and right-wing Senator Flávio Bolsonaro after neither candidate secured the more than 50% of valid votes needed to win outright.

The race was tight, with Flávio Bolsonaro finishing ahead of Lula in Sunday's first-round election. With more than 99% of the vote counted, Bolsonaro secured roughly 47% of the vote, while Lula came in second place with 45%.

If that sounds like déjà -vú, it's because in many ways, this election is a rerun: Lula narrowly defeated Bolsonaro's father, former right-wing President Jair Bolsonaro, in 2022. Jair Bolsonaro is now serving a 27-year prison sentence under house arrest after being convicted of plotting to overturn that election and prevent Lula from taking office.

The Americas 
            Brazil's ex-President Bolsonaro sentenced to 27 years for coup plot
         
         

      
      

   
   

   Flávio has pledged to carry on his father's legacy. Speaking to journalists and supporters outside his home in Brasília after the results came in, he said the vote showed Brazilians were ready for a political change.

"Brazil wants change, that's the reading of what happened today," Bolsonaro said. "It's the end of the Workers' Party era," he added, referring to Lula's political party.

Sunday's results also pointed to a broader rightward shift in Brazilian politics, with the Bolsonaro camp performing strongly across the country.

Lula sought to rally his supporters in São Paulo, framing the next stage of the campaign as a fresh contest.

"Tomorrow we start a new campaign," Lula said. "I am very good in the knockout stage. We will see who has the best plan."

Lula also took aim at his opponent, warning voters about Bolsonaro's political background. "On the other side we have an uncertainty with a biography of a dark past," he said.

The presidential candidates who came in third, fourth, and fifth place are all right-wing, suggesting that Bolsonaro could have a natural pool of voters to draw from in the runoff. That could set the stage for another extremely tight contest on October 25.

Brazilians also chose governors and state and federal lawmakers Sunday, with early results showing that the right also made significant gains in Congress, particularly in the Senate. That could give Bolsonaro a stronger political base if he wins the presidency.

Lula, 80, is aiming for his fourth nonconsecutive term and has pledged to continue broad social spending and to stand up to Trump's aggressive policies toward Latin America.

Bolsonaro, 45, pledges to slash the deficit and realign the country's foreign policy with Washington. The result suggests Lula will now have to do more than defend his record: he will need to rebuild the broad coalition that returned him to power in 2022, including among younger voters who have shown less enthusiasm for his campaign.

This year's presidential campaign featured smaller rallies compared to past years, perhaps because both of the candidates felt like known quantities to voters.

"I think the campaign feels more muted because people are tired of fighting," said 38-year-old nutritionist Raysa Tavares after she voted Sunday afternoon in the Rio de Janeiro favela of Vidigal.

Businessman Caio Farias, 37, who voted in Rio's upscale neighborhood of Leblon, said that he preferred other right-wing candidates to Bolsonaro, but voted for Bolsonaro in an effort to try to get the election over in one round.

Now, Brazilians are gearing up for another three weeks of campaigning. In the 2022 election, the second round of the election saw a sharp uptick in political violence, with dozens of people physically attacking each other for political reasons, Brazilian news site Pública reported.

Beyond the fact that this year's contest features a younger Bolsonaro, there's something else setting it apart from the last one: Trump is in the White House, with big ambitions for drawing politics in Latin America to the right. Lula has accused the United States of trying to meddle in Brazil's election, which the U.S. State Department has denied.

Bolsonaro rallies have featured American flags and a giant inflatable doll of Trump holding a jailed Lula, while Lula has campaigned on the idea of protecting Brazilian sovereignty from foreign interference—a rarely-heard watchword in 2022. In Rio on election day, voters could be seen on the streets both with Trump T-shirts and "out with Trump" stickers.

The topic of Brazil's relationship with the United States is sure to feature in second-round campaigning, as are domestic themes of security policy, corruption, and the economy, which polls say are top of voters' minds.

The Americas 
            Picanha, prices and politics: What Brazil's favorite steak says about the election 
         
         

      
      

   
   

   But the first-round results have added another defining issue to the runoff: whether Brazil wants to continue with Lula or embrace the broader rightward shift that emerged from Sunday's vote.

NPR does not offer or accept money for coverage or interviews.
                Anyone who makes such an offer or request is not an NPR employee and does not represent NPR.