URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2026/oct/02/france-schools-protests-violence-ukraine-kallas-rome-pope-latest-news-updates
The Guardian Europe live blog | opened 2026-10-02 09:09 BST, closed 2026-10-02 17:11 BST - CONFIRMED 2 OCTOBER. Contains FULL G7 statement text from Elysee Palace, von der Leyen quote, French education-minister meeting outcome, Klitschko quotes.

###URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2026/oct/02/france-schools-protests-violence-ukraine-kallas-rome-pope-latest-news-updates
###DATES: datePublished=2026-10-02T16:11:12.000Z | dateModified=2026-10-02T16:12:11.000Z | article:modified_time=2026-10-02T16:12:11.000Z | article:published_time=2026-10-02T16:11:12.000Z
###H1: G7 to release 100m barrels from reserves to combat surging diesel prices – as it happened
This blog is now closed, you can read more on this story here
French President Emmanuel Macron speaks following a video conference with G7 leaders at the Elysee Palace in Paris. Photograph: Jeanne Accorsini/SIPA/Shutterstock View image in fullscreen French President Emmanuel Macron speaks following a video conference with G7 leaders at the Elysee Palace in Paris. Photograph: Jeanne Accorsini/SIPA/Shutterstock Jakub Krupa (now) and Taz Ali (earlier)Fri 2 Oct 2026 17.11 BSTFirst published on Fri 2 Oct 2026 09.09 BSTShare From 3h ago15.27 BSTG7 to work in 'coordinated manner' to 'bring down prices of petroleum products,' Macron saysFrance’s Emmanuel Macron said G7 leaders agreed “to work in a coordinated manner to help bring down the prices of petroleum products, particularly diesel.”
→ make production more flexible to produce at the maximum capacity of our refineries,
→ release our strategic reserves up to 100 million barrels, within 4 months, with our partners, under the coordination of the International Energy Agency,
→ take no measures to restrict the exchange of energy and petroleum products between partner countries.”
And, on that note, we will be closing the blog for today.
Leaders of G7 nations are to release up to 100m barrels of their emergency diesel and crude oil stockpiles after coming under pressure from Donald Trump to ease surging fuel prices (16:27, 16:40, 16:54, 17:31).
For more updates, follow the US live blog here:
Hundreds of schools across France saw disruptions today, as student protests continue and escalate to violent incidents, with hundreds of people arrested today (13:16).
The French government is struggling to deal with its worst crisis in months after it was taken by surprise by the thousands of teenagers demonstrating outside schools across the country this week (10:09, 11:54, 12:23, 14:33, 14:56, 15:17, 15:49).
The protests are expected to continue next week (17:47).
Sweden’s Social Democratic leader Magdalena Andersson has been given another change to form the new Swedish government, with seven days to report back on the progress (11:21).
The Spanish government lost two key votes to ratify a package of emergency measures aimed at tackling the nation’s housing affordability crisis – just as protesters marched on the parliament demanding help for renters (15:59).
Kyiv mayor Vitali Klitschko warned that Russian attacks are “tearing Kyiv apart,” amid dramatic escalation in relentless strikes in the city (18:01).
If you have any tips, comments or suggestions, email me at jakub.krupa@theguardian.com.
I am also on Bluesky at @jakubkrupa.bsky.social and on X at @jakubkrupa.
Let’s bring you a quick update from Ukraine, as the capital city of Kyiv continues to be severely affected by relentless Russian strikes.
Kyiv mayor Vitali Klitschko said that Russian attacks were “tearing Kyiv apart,” putting it “in a very dramatic situation.”
View image in fullscreen A woman carrying her pet walks at the site of a Russian drone strike on a high-rise building in Kyiv, Ukraine. Photograph: Sergey Dolzhenko/EPA“It’s no longer possible to pretend that we can live now as we lived in peacetime. The enemy is tearing Kyiv apart,” he said on Telegram.
“[Russia is] destroying infrastructure, critical infrastructure, logistics networks, housing, and social facilities. The aggressor has once again set out to destroy our energy system.”
During the day, Russia once again hit one of Kyiv’s main bridges, causing significant disruption to city traffic.
View image in fullscreen Smoke rises over a bridge spanning the Dnipro River following a drone attack in Kyiv. Photograph: Serhii Okunev/AFP/Getty Images View image in fullscreen A traffic jam clogs a street to the left bank of the city, after Russian jet drone strikes on Kyiv's bridges caused disruptions. Photograph: Thomas Peter/ReutersShare 1h ago16.47 BSTFurther 'mobilisation' in French students' strike planned for TuesdayThere’s more news coming from France, with a coalition of unions reportedly calling for a mobilisation on Tuesday, including a strike action, as reported by Le Figaro.
After a meeting with the education minister Édouard Geffray, high school and student organisations called for further mobilisation, lamenting the absence of “concrete measures” proposed in the meantime.
This comes after another hectic day of protests and street violence today, with authorities estimating damage as running into tens of millions of euros.
View image in fullscreen A fire involving rubbish bins in front of Antoine Bourdelle Sixth Form College. Photograph: Huchot-Boissier Patricia/ABACA/Shutterstock View image in fullscreen Clashes between students and police during a student protest in Pantin, near Paris, France. Photograph: CLPRESS/ABACA/Shutterstock View image in fullscreen Young demonstrators run through the streets as teargas is fired during a high school student protest in Lyon, France. Photograph: Konrad K/SIPA/ShutterstockShare Updated at 16.56 BST2h ago16.31 BSTIt’s fair to say that the G7 decision is much awaited as several countries continue to face high fuel prices.
For example, British motorists face more pressure at the pumps after the average price of diesel climbed to a record £2 a litre.
The price of a litre at UK forecourts has risen 40.5% since late February, when the US-Israel war on Iran began disrupting supplies of crude and refined oil products from the Gulf, leading to cost increases across the economy.
Some countries are taking domestic decision to lower the price: in Germany, fuel subsidies aimed at softening the impact of the Middle East war energy shock came into force yesterday, AFP reported.
The new restrictions put in place by the government do allow for filling stations to raise prices once a day at 12pm.
“On average, consumers are paying today, at around 12:15 p.m. (local time), between 14 and 15 cents less than yesterday, depending on the type of fuel,” the German automobile association (ADAC) told AFP.
View image in fullscreen Fuel prices displayed at a petrol station in Berlin's Spandau district. Photograph: John MacDougall/AFP/Getty ImagesShare 2h ago15.54 BSTEU's von der Leyen welcomes G7's deal averting US diesel export banThe European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, responded to the G7 announcement, stressing the citizens “need and deserve affordable energy.”
“Our citizens need and deserve affordable energy. As @G7, we will closely coordinate towards to achieve this goal.
We welcome the decision of G7 countries not to impose any export bans on allies and the continued solidarity between partners.
We support an @IEA-coordinated release of fuel stocks. While staying the course on the clean transition, to gain more energy security.”
Here is the G7’s statement in full, as released by the Élysée Palace.
Just a quick reminder that G7 includes Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, and Japan.
I have highlighted some bits in bold for key information for you.
“Today, We, the Leaders of the G7, convened a virtual meeting to address the deepening challenges to our energy security. Facing unprecedented volatility in oil markets - with surging prices threatening economic stability and the well-being of our citizens - we have agreed on decisive, coordinated measures to stabilize immediate energy supplies, shield households and businesses from price shocks, and strengthen the long-term resilience of global energy systems.
We will coordinate maintenance schedules across G7 refineries to prevent simultaneous capacity shutdowns and temporarily increase utilization rates where feasible. We also encourage engagement with countries holding significant refining capacities to boost global production of refined products, particularly diesel, in light of ongoing market pressures in this segment.
The G7 requests the IEA to monitor the immediate and full implementation of the March 2026 commitments. In this regard, taking into account commitments that have already been fulfilled, we will implement our commitments with a coordinated release through the IEA of 100 million barrels (MB) to begin immediately over 4 months, including a frontloaded substantial diesel release within the first 20 days by G7 members and partners. We will convene in the context of the IEA in the coming days to discuss the possibility of additional diesel releases as necessary.
We reaffirm our commitment to refrain from export restrictions on energy and energy products between G7 countries and call on all producers to refrain from imposing bans that could exacerbate market tensions.
We invite the IEA to monitor the impact of these measures on energy security and market stability and to monitor implementation of commitments. A follow-up report should be delivered before 20 days, include actionable recommendations to enhance future responses, including stocks replenishment.
We condemn Iran’s continued attacks against its regional neighbours and its disruption of international trade, energy security and the global economy. We call for the immediate and full restoration of navigational rights and principles in the Strait of Hormuz and express our determination to redouble our collective efforts to that end. We commend the United States for its efforts to ensure the free flow of commerce through the strait of Hormuz.
We will maintain sanctions against Russia while working with the IEA and global partners to prevent further spillovers into fuel, gas, and other commodity markets.
Our citizens’ concerns about energy prices remain a top priority. We will monitor developments closely and stand ready to adjust measures as needed. Today’s agreements mark a step toward a more secure, transparent, and resilient energy future.”
France’s Emmanuel Macron said G7 leaders agreed “to work in a coordinated manner to help bring down the prices of petroleum products, particularly diesel.”
→ make production more flexible to produce at the maximum capacity of our refineries,
→ release our strategic reserves up to 100 million barrels, within 4 months, with our partners, under the coordination of the International Energy Agency,
→ take no measures to restrict the exchange of energy and petroleum products between partner countries.”
Meanwhile, we are getting big news coming from the G7 meeting, with US president Donald Trump saying that Europe has agreed to release some of its diesel reserves “immediately” (14:19).
Trump announced the action Friday on social media without offering details on which countries were releasing reserves or at what volumes.
“Europe has just agreed to release a massive amount of their heavily stocked Diesel Oil,” Trump wrote. “The process will begin immediately.”
Let me bring you an update from Spain where the government lost two key votes to ratify a package of emergency measures aimed at tackling the nation’s housing affordability crisis – just as protesters marched on the parliament demanding help for renters (12:31).
View image in fullscreen A group of people protest from the stands during an extraordinary parliamentary session to vote on a government housing decree at the Congress of Deputies in Madrid. Photograph: Javier Soriano/AFP/Getty ImagesAP reported that the Catalan separatist party Junts carried out its announcement made hours before that it would vote against both decrees. That doomed the measures when combined with the “No” from the center-right Popular Party and far-right Vox.
View image in fullscreen Demonstrators run from tear gas during student protests in Lyon, eastern France. Photograph: Alex Martin/AFP/Getty Images View image in fullscreen French police in riot gear detain a demonstrator during student protests in Saint-Pierre, on the French overseas island of La Reunion. Photograph: Richard Bouhet/AFP/Getty Images View image in fullscreen A sign says ‘Democracy does not stop at the high school gates’ outside Michelet Sixth Form College in Montauban. Photograph: Huchot-Boissier Patricia/ABACA/Shutterstock View image in fullscreen A worker operates on the burnt facade of the Henri Moisson school, following student demonstrations in Meaux, France. Photograph: Kenzo Tribouillard/AFP/Getty ImagesShare 4h ago14.42 BSTTaz AliSomething a little different – a new social media trend has seen tourists in Prague queue near the famed Charles Bridge to recreate a 1988 photo of the iconic British band Depeche Mode.
The black and white image shows Dave Gahan (facing the camera) and Martin Gore (looking towards the bridge) standing next to the Pietà sculpture.
AP has more on how the photo has captured the imaginations of international visitors to Czechia:
Fans have been making the pilgrimage for years, but photographs of a mass gathering on the bridge between the band’s Prague concerts in 2024 appear to have helped fuel a modern-day boom.
Currently, the photo recreated by the visiting fans is trending with millions of views on social media.
Jorge Sanchez, from California, and his wife were among the recent visitors.
“Well, I remember seeing the picture from way back, and then I kind of remember, and I looked it up, and I learned that it was here, so I wanted to make sure I took a picture,” Sanchez said.
“I think it fit at the time, you know, with their music, you know, and their message and their music with your personal Jesus and all of that, so it’s kind of fitting.”
View image in fullscreen People pose to recreate a famous photo of two members of Depeche Mode by the Pietà statue in Prague. Photograph: Petr David Josek/AP View image in fullscreen The 1988 image of Dave Gahan and Martin Gore was captured by renowned Dutch photographer Anton Corbijn. Photograph: Petr David Josek/AP View image in fullscreen People wait in line to recreate the photo. Photograph: Petr David Josek/AP View image in fullscreen Jorge Sanchez from Los Angeles displays the 1988 image he wants to recreate. Photograph: Petr David Josek/APShare Updated at 15.16 BST4h ago14.17 BST‘We just want to be listened to’: student protests shut schools across FranceMy colleague Angelique Chrisafis in Paris has the full report here on the student protests in France.
As dozens of school pupils sat on top of a pile of wheelie bins blocking a high school entrance in north-eastern Paris, Sophia, 17, was on the frontline of the barricade, when she would normally have been attending Spanish class.
“We hope this grows into a massive youth protest movement,” said the final year baccalaureate student at Paris’s Lycée Voltaire, who did not want her real name published. She was on her second day of blocking the school entrance along with hundreds of others, ensuring all lessons were cancelled. “We just want to be listened to by the government. We’d rather stand here doing this than have to learn in poor conditions. It’s the only way to make ourselves heard.”
View image in fullscreen French students gather outside the Lycee Voltaire high school as part of nationwide protests. Photograph: Sarah Meyssonnier/Reuters “School is a right, not a privilege,” read a cardboard sign as Sophia listed the grievances of teenagers across France: a lack of state investment in education, overcrowded classes of up to 40 children in crumbling buildings, poor teacher pay, staff absences and an unequal system in which social background determined success. Other reasons for the protest included the opaque and difficult online system for university applications as well as the unbearable temperatures in classrooms during the heatwaves in May and June.
“The education budget is being cut to shreds while so much extra funding is being put into the army,” said Sophia, who wanted to go on to study art and work in animation. She said she hoped the demonstrations and blockades would continue into next week. Several teachers stood by the barricades in support.
A police officer deployed to the school protests in Belfort, north-east France was brutally attacked after another off-duty cop arrested a young man, Belfort prosecutor Paul-Edouard Lallois told the AFP news agency.
The officer was “attacked by a mob of young people” near the Courbet secondary school in Belfort at 9.15am local time. The group “knocked him to the ground and beat him with their fists and feet, particularly around the head”, said Lallois, who announced he will open an investigation for attempted murder of a public official. He is scheduled to hold a press conference this afternoon.
Police backup “quickly intervened to disperse the group of attackers” and provide assistance to the officer, Lallois added. He suffered “a brief loss of consciousness” and sustained “several wounds” to his face.
