URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ckp848925lgmo
BBC News NI | published 2 Oct 2026 12:50 BST, updated 2 Oct 2026 17:59 BST

Drumcree dispute: PSNI says 'major public safety operation' to continue - BBC News BBC Homepage
Skip to content
Accessibility Help
Your account
Notifications
Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sounds
Bitesize
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
More menu
More menu
Search BBC
Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sounds
Bitesize
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
Close menu
BBC News
Menu
Home
World
Business
Culture
Politics
Health
Tech
InDepth
BBC Verify
Climate
More
Science
Family & Education
In Pictures
Disability
Newsbeat
N. Ireland
N. Ireland Politics
Drumcree: Major public safety operation gets under way as NI Secretary appeals for calm
Image source, PA Media
Image caption, Assistant Chief Constable Ryan Henderson said the PSNI was doing "everything we can to maintain order and ensure the safety of everyone in that area"
By Bernadette Allen ,  Reporting from Portadown ,  Catherine Doyle ,  BBC News NI ,  Mark Simpson ,  Community correspondent   and   Brendan Hughes ,  Political reporter
Published
2 October 2026, 12:50 BST
Updated 14 minutes ago
The Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) has said a "major public safety operation" will continue in Portadown this weekend.
The PSNI is "continuing to seek safe and peaceful compliance with the Parades Commission determination" at Drumcree and said its "investigation into anyone suspected of breaking the law related to this dispute is continuing at pace".
Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Chris Bryant "urged calm this weekend" and said "everyone across Northern Ireland wants a peaceful resolution to the situation".
On Wednesday, the PSNI chief constable said there would be an investigation after protesters blocked the mainly nationalist road to prevent an Orange Order parade from happening.
Image source, PA Media
Image caption, DUP leader Gavin Robinson said there has to be "consequences" to "people who are law makers who are acting as law breakers"
Assistant Chief Constable Ryan Henderson said the PSNI was doing "everything we can to maintain order and ensure the safety of everyone in that area".
"I want to thank those officers from Police Services in England and Scotland who have been in Northern Ireland supporting our efforts over the past week," he added.
"Finally, I want to repeat the Chief Constable's appeal for calm and for all parties to refocus efforts on working to find a lasting resolution to this issue."
Protesters remain on Garvaghy Road and the Orange Order has maintained a presence at Drumcree church after talks to end the parading dispute ended without agreement.
The Orange Order's Portadown District said on Friday that its position "has been clear from the outset: we set out to complete our parade through lawful and peaceful means, and despite the provocation and threats we have faced, it remains our firm intention to continue on that path".
"Our community has demonstrated considerable restraint, dignity and patience, and we strongly encourage everyone to continue conducting themselves lawfully and peacefully," it added in a social media post , external .
It said "rounds of talks with the Secretary of State concluded last night without agreement" and the "District is now carefully assessing the position and considering its next steps over the coming days".
The statement added that it remains "committed to pursuing a lawful and peaceful resolution".
The Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) leader Gavin Robinson said he expects the criminal investigation into the unlawful blocking of Garvaghy Road to begin next week.
Earlier, Robinson said there had to be "consequences" for "people who are law makers who are acting as law breakers".
First Minister Michelle O'Neill was among those who attended the protest. She has said she understands the law, but chose to "stand in solidarity" with residents.
Robinson said he expected the investigation to begin next week "but it needs the space to see it conclude as well".
The fallout over the proposed Orange Order march - which is opposed by residents of the Garvaghy Road - has lasted since Sunday morning .
A fresh legal bid by the residents to prevent the march was due to be heard on Friday - but has now been postponed until Monday.
Orangemen and Garvaghy Road residents met Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Chris Bryant at Hillsborough Castle on Thursday night but did not break their deadlock.
Speaking after Thursday night's talks, Sir Chris told reporters: "I think this is the end of these conversations.
"We haven't come to a settled agreement and it's a shame but my door remains open."
Breándan Mac Cionnaith, the chairman of the Garvaghy Road Residents' Coalition, said there had been no "meeting of minds".
Nigel Dawson, the Orange Order's Portadown district master, said it "remains as it has been".
Image source, PA Media
Image caption, Sir Chris Bryant says he is open to hosting further talks
On Friday morning, about 20 protesters were gathered on the Garvaghy Road.
About a mile away at Drumcree Church, five members of the Orange Order were present.
The rector of Drumcree Church has said that he has received hundreds of "extremely nasty" emails, texts and calls in recent days.
In a post on Facebook, the Reverend Gary Galway said: "Social media has given a platform for individuals to express themselves without restraint, or the integrity of a face-to-face civil discussion."
Image source, PA Media
Analysis: Momentum lost after failed talks
Hopes of a resolution to the Drumcree dispute have faded but have not disappeared completely.
By engaging in a four-day talks process, the two sides have shown a willingness to try to negotiate an agreement.
Further discussions at some stage are still possible. Some might say they are inevitable.
However, momentum has been lost and the danger is that the problem now just festers for days, months or even years.
That would be bad for community relations and a strain on police resources as they keep a round-the-clock watch on Drumcree hill and the Garvaghy Road.
For all concerned, a difficult road lies ahead.
Councillors reported to standards watchdog
The stalemate has reopened what was once the most bitter parading dispute in Northern Ireland, with stand-offs in the mid-to-late 1990s accompanied by riots, roadblocks and killings.
In 1998, the newly-established Parades Commission, which adjudicates on marching disputes, ruled that the Orange Order should not march down the road - a decision that was upheld for the past 28 years.
But last week the Parades Commission decided that the parade could go ahead on Sunday morning with restrictions in place.
That prompted a large protest on the Garvaghy Road, preventing the Orange Order from marching.
Thirteen councillors have been reported to the local government standards watchdog over conduct surrounding the parading dispute.
Some 25 allegations have been received by the Local Government Commissioner for Standards in Northern Ireland in recent days concerning potential breaches of the councillors' code of conduct.
It follows unionist parties accusing nationalist politicians of acting unlawfully over their involvement in the protest at Garvaghy Road on Sunday.
'A wake-up call'
On Friday, former US diplomat Dr Richard Haass told BBC News NI that Northern Ireland had "failed" to come to terms with the legacy of its past.
Haass chaired all-party talks in Northern Ireland in 2013 aimed at resolving contentious issues, including parades.
He said the flare-up of the Drumcree dispute should be "a bit of a warning shot or a wake-up call".
"I don't think any of us should take progress for granted. Backsliding is always possible," he added.
Image source, Getty Images
Image caption, Orangemen gathered at Drumcree Church on Sunday but were blocked from completing their march
More than 200 people from a Protestant background have put their names to a letter to the UK and Irish governments, expressing concern over the dispute.
In the letter, they said they were distressed by the "trauma that is being visited on the residents of the Garvaghy Road after 28 years of calm".
The signatories said they recognised that parading was a "valued tradition" for many but they appealed to the Orange Order to "look towards the bigger picture and bring this impasse to an end in the interests of the entire community".
Related topics
Northern Ireland
Drumcree
Portadown
More on this story
What is the Garvaghy Road dispute all about?
Published
3 days ago
Drumcree policing operation has cost £3m so far, says Boutcher
Published
1 day ago
Orange Order march row goes to heart of ongoing divisions in Northern Ireland
Published
4 days ago
The video playlist
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
Previous Next
1:32 Is UK politics 'boomer-centric'? 00:01:32, play video Is UK politics 'boomer-centric'?
1:28 Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever? 00:01:28, play video Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever?
1:01 ‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video ‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
1:23 Masked men brutally attack cryptocurrency investor and wife. 00:01:23, play video Masked men brutally attack cryptocurrency investor and wife
0:38 Ferguson on recovery from brain haemorrhage. 00:00:38, play video Ferguson on recovery from brain haemorrhage
1:44 Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank. 00:01:44, play video Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank
1:23 How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics. 00:01:23, play video How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics
1:45 Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack. 00:01:45, play video Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack
0:54 Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home. 00:00:54, play video Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home
1:05 Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man. 00:01:05, play video Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man
0:55 Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries. 00:00:55, play video Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries
1:15 What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution. 00:01:15, play video What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution
1:12 Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp? 00:01:12, play video Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp?
0:54 New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI. 00:00:54, play video New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI
0:59 What makes you socially anxious? 00:00:59, play video What makes you socially anxious?
0:38 AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen... 00:00:38, play video AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen...
1:01 Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when? 00:01:01, play video Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when?
0:44 Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school. 00:00:44, play video Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school
Top stories
Live .  G7 to release up to 100 million barrels of diesel and crude oil in bid to stop soaring prices
7391 viewing 7.4k viewing
Riot police clash with students as education protests rage in France
Published
47 minutes ago
Watch: Why students in France are protesting
Published
2 hours ago
More to explore
What's really going on with the lymphatic drainage beauty trend videos?
Chaos, coffins and 'Claudiapatra' steal the show in Celebrity Traitors
Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case. Video Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case
What happened in the failed execution of Christa Pike - and what next?
Weekly quiz: How did two champions fight over marathon dates for next year's London races?
Watch: Endangered moths swarming Australia's east coast. Video Watch: Endangered moths swarming Australia's east coast
Ferguson 'terrified' before 'fantastic' return to Man Utd after brain haemorrhage
Attribution
Sport
Farming award joy for teen inspired by late grandad
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
loading elsewhere stories
Most read
1 I've seen nearly 500 executions - but never one like Christa Pike's
2 Alison Hammond has heart check-up in hospital after leaving TV's This Morning
3 Woman who killed abusive partner has murder conviction overturned
4 Dolly Parton sings Jolene in Welsh in recording released after her death
5 Woman at centre of Cornell rape inquiry was 'failed' by officials, says New York governor
6 Riot police clash with students as education protests rage in France
7 LFB named in Met's evidence file on Grenfell fire
8 Two people dead after workplace incident near rural road
9 Son of ex-Chelsea player died in 40C desert hike
10 Parents say toddler found in middle of main road after wandering off from nursery
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On smart speakers
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Movie Magic on BBC iPlayer
What, like it's hard? Noughties rom-com starring Reese Witherspoon
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Legally Blonde to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Legally Blonde has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Brad Pitt leads a US tank crew on a dangerous mission in WWII
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Fury to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Fury has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Comedy drama charting the fight for women's equal pay in 1968
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Made in Dagenham to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Made in Dagenham has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Oscar-winning psychological thriller starring Daniel Kaluuya
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Get Out to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Get Out has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sound
