URL: https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2026/oct/02/polanski-green-leader-authority-byelection-holborn-pancras
The Guardian | first published 2 Oct 2026 12:04 BST, updated 2 Oct 2026 16:56 BST

DP ['2026-10-02T15:56:09.000Z'] DM ['2026-10-02T17:12:05.000Z']
ment
Obituaries
Senior Green party figures fear a defeat in Holborn and St Pancras could severely damage Polanski’s leadership. Photograph: Sean Smith/The Guardian
View image in fullscreen
Senior Green party figures fear a defeat in Holborn and St Pancras could severely damage Polanski’s leadership. Photograph: Sean Smith/The Guardian
Green party
Polanski says he does not need to win ‘50/50’ byelection to stay Green leader
Exclusive: Party leader says outcome of ‘knife-edge’ vote in Keir Starmer’s former seat will not affect his position
Aletha Adu Political correspondent
Fri 2 Oct 2026 16.56 BST First published on Fri 2 Oct 2026 12.04 BST
Share
Prefer the Guardian on Google
Zack Polanski has said his authority as leader of the Green party of England and Wales does not depend on winning next week’s Holborn and St Pancras byelection , amid suggestions the party’s popularity may have peaked.
Polanski, who is trying to take Keir Starmer’s former seat from Labour, described the contest as “probably 50/50 right now” and “really on a knife edge”.
Asked in an interview with the Guardian how much his position as leader depended on victory, Polanski said: “It doesn’t depend on it whatsoever.”
He said the election had ramifications for politics nationally but “not for my leadership”.
“I’ll be completely honest, it won’t surprise you to know that I want to win the seat,” Polanski said. “I think the seat is winnable, and I think it’s probably 50/50 right now. It’s really, really on a knife edge.”
Senior Green party figures privately fear a defeat in Holborn and St Pancras could severely damage Polanski’s leadership, amid concerns the party’s rapid rise in membership and polling has not translated into campaigning strength on the ground.
Attempts to concentrate resources on the byelection have caused internal friction, with the Guardian revealing last month that Polanski wanted the Greens’ annual conference postponed so the party could focus on the contest. That proposal was rejected by its executive.
View image in fullscreen
Delegates arriving at the Green party’s annual conference in Brighton on Friday. Photograph: Sean Smith/The Guardian Polanski, who has never been an MP, maintained there were “still advantages to being a leader outside Westminster”, while also arguing that entering parliament would offer another way of putting pressure on the Labour government.
Polanski is facing a separate test of his leadership at the Green party’s annual conference, where members are due to debate a deeply contentious motion declaring “Zionism is racism” on Saturday.
Asked about criticism from senior Greens who believe he has failed to provide leadership over the issue, he said: “Leadership is about priorities, and this motion isn’t my priority. My priority is the cost of living. My priority is nationalising Thames Water. My priority is ending the genocide that’s happening in Gaza and freeing Palestine.”
Can Zack Polanski win Keir Starmer’s old seat? – podcast
Read more
Caroline Lucas, the former leader of the Greens, Adrian Ramsay, the former co-leader, and Rachel Millward, a current co-deputy leader, have distanced themselves from the motion, warning it could be “divisive”.
Some Jewish Greens have raised concerns about what the motion could mean for their place within the party.
Asked whether he could guarantee that a Jewish member would not face disciplinary action simply for attending a synagogue that identified as Zionist, Polanski said: “I can guarantee that this motion has absolutely nothing to do with disciplinary action against anyone.”
The byelection has become an early test of whether Labour under Andy Burnham can reclaim progressive voters who have moved towards the Greens, and the result may inform the government’s decisions over expanding North Sea oil and gas drilling .
“I see this election as high-stakes for people in Holborn and St Pancras and high-stakes for the climate crisis,” Polanski said. “We know that … a decision on [drilling projects Rosebank and Jackdaw] has been delayed until after this byelection, because Andy Burnham literally wants to see whether he can get away with drilling for new North Sea oil and gas.”
The Guardian has reported that the Jackdaw decision is likely to be held until after the byelection , while a decision on Rosebank is still pending. Burnham has promised a more “pragmatic” approach to North Sea oil and gas than his predecessor, as the government balances its climate commitments against pressure over energy security and jobs.
skip past newsletter promotion Free newsletter | Every weekday
Sign up to First Edition
Our morning email breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
Enter your email
Sign up
after newsletter promotion
Both projects already hold licences granted under the Conservatives, meaning approval by Labour would not amount to issuing new exploration licences.
Asked whether Burnham’s surge could win back younger and progressive voters from the Greens, Polanski said there were two possibilities. One was that Burnham “means w
