URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2026/oct/02/drumcree-talks-no-agreement-northern-ireland
The Guardian | 2 Oct 2026

Drumcree talks break up without agreement on fifth day of standoff | Northern Ireland | The Guardian
Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 2 Next image Previous image Toggle caption
Print subscriptions
Search jobs
Sign in
UK UK edition
US edition
Australia edition
Europe edition
International edition
The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more Hide expanded menu
News View all News
UK news
US politics
World news
Climate crisis
Middle East
Ukraine
Football
Newsletters
Business
Environment
UK politics
Science
Tech
Global development
Obituaries
Opinion View all Opinion
The Guardian view
Columnists
Cartoons
Opinion videos
Letters
Sport View all Sport
Football
Cricket
Rugby union
Tennis
Cycling
Golf
Boxing
Rugby league
Racing
US sports
Culture View all Culture
Film
Music
TV & radio
Books
Art & design
Stage
Games
Classical
Lifestyle View all Lifestyle
The Filter
Fashion
Food
Recipes
Travel
Health & fitness
Women
Men
Love & sex
Beauty
Home & garden
Money
Cars
Search input
google-search
Search
Support us
Print subscriptions
Search jobs
Hire with Guardian Jobs
Holidays
Live events
About Us
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Guardian Licensing
The Guardian app
Video
Podcasts
Pictures
Newsletters
Today's paper
Inside the Guardian
Guardian Weekly
Crosswords
Wordiply
Corrections
Tips
Search input
google-search
Search
Search jobs
Hire with Guardian Jobs
Holidays
Live events
About Us
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Guardian Licensing
UK politics
Education
Media
Society
Law
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
People watch a band perform on Garvaghy Road in Portadown on Thursday. Photograph: Liam McBurney/PA
View image in fullscreen
People watch a band perform on Garvaghy Road in Portadown on Thursday. Photograph: Liam McBurney/PA
Northern Ireland
Drumcree talks break up without agreement on fifth day of standoff
Dispute over march will go to legal appeal on Monday after talks hosted by Northern Ireland secretary end
Lisa O’Carroll
Fri 2 Oct 2026 10.16 BST First published on Fri 2 Oct 2026 02.07 BST
Share
Prefer the Guardian on Google
Talks aimed at resolving the Drumcree parade dispute have broken up without agreement, with the Northern Ireland secretary, Chris Bryant, describing the situation as being between a “rock and a hard place”.
Speaking on Thursday night after the latest talks with the Orange Order and residents of Garvaghy Road broke up, Bryant said: “I think this is the end of these conversations. We haven’t come to a settled agreement, and it’s a shame, but my door remains open.”
Last Friday’s Parades Commission decision to grant the Orange Order the right to hold a procession down the nationalist Garvaghy Road plunged Northern Ireland into one of its most perilous periods since the 1998 peace deal.
A legal appeal by the Garvaghy Road Residents’ Coalition originally scheduled for Friday has been pushed back to Monday to facilitate any further talks.
“Obviously we’ll have to see how that plays out,” Bryant said, indicating he would not be intervening unilaterally. “I would say that the law, in the end, is the law.”
Five days of talks ended in deadlock, he said, outlining the compromises on the table for the first time. “We’ve discussed a wide range of options, including mediation, including an option where the right to march was respected but wasn’t exercised, including an option where there was a final march and no further applications for marches into the future, and we’ve not managed to come to agreement on any of all that.”
View image in fullscreen
Chris Bryant arrives at Hillsborough castle for talks on Thursday. Photograph: Liam McBurney/PA Earlier in the week, reports suggested one option was a “one and done” parade involving just a dozen people without insignia in October. This would have been on condition the Orange Order would never apply for permit for that parade route again.
Breandán Mac Cionnaith, of the Garvaghy Road Residents’ Coalition said “the reality is” there was “no such thing as half a march”. “There’s a march or there’s not a march – simply that,” he said.
Jamie Bryson, a legal adviser to the Orange Order, who earlier this week said he would “not surrender” said he would accept Monday’s ruling.
“The challenge that we would put down to the Garvaghy Road residents – they’re going to the court of appeal on Monday – if the court of appeal upholds this determination, commit to accepting the law and walk away, and we’ll do the same,” he said. “Abide by the law, and if the court of appeal upholds the determination, get off the road, stop breaking the law and allow the parade to go ahead. If we lose, we’ll accept that.”
Absence of violence in Drumcree does not make standoff any less significant
Read more
The dispute began last week after the march along the mainly nationalist Garvaghy Road was given the go-ahead by the Parades Commission for the first time since 1998 , a decision denounced by Sinn Féin as “madness” and by the taoiseach as “incomprehensible and wrong”.
The dispute, which threatened to collapse Stormont and has returned Northern Ireland to bleak days of the past, has also revived the interest of key US Democrats. Richie Neal, the US representative for Massachussetts’ 1st congressional district, described the parade as “needlessly provocative”.
The Congressional Friends of Ireland Caucus, which Neal sits on, wrote to Bryant urging him to use his powers to reverse the Parades Commission decision.
“Over the last three decades, the progress made on the island of Ireland has been nothing short of extraordinary. Twenty-eight years have passed since the signing of the Good Friday agreement, and a generation has grown without a single memory of the Troubles,” the lawmakers wrote.
“Without decisive action, we risk reopening one of the most painful chapters of Northern Ireland’s history and undermining nearly three decades of peace, stability and reconciliation made possible by the Good Friday agreement.”
The Northern Ireland Policing Board has been told that the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) operation around the parading dispute has topped £3m.
Explore more on these topics Northern Ireland
Northern Irish politics
Ireland
Chris Bryant
news
Share
Reuse this content
Most viewed
Most viewed
UK politics
Education
Media
Society
Law
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Modern Slavery Act
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Patrons
Work with us
Accessibility settings
Back to top
© 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)
