URL: https://www.theguardian.com/education/2026/oct/02/school-inspections-england-ofsted-overhaul-complaints
The Guardian | published 2 Oct 2026 17:00 BST, last modified 2 Oct 2026 17:19 BST

England school inspections to be overhauled again after barrage of complaints | Schools | The Guardian
Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 2 Next image Previous image Toggle caption
Print subscriptions
Search jobs
Sign in
UK UK edition
US edition
Australia edition
Europe edition
International edition
The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more Hide expanded menu
News View all News
UK news
US politics
World news
Climate crisis
Middle East
Ukraine
Football
Newsletters
Business
Environment
UK politics
Science
Tech
Global development
Obituaries
Opinion View all Opinion
The Guardian view
Columnists
Cartoons
Opinion videos
Letters
Sport View all Sport
Football
Cricket
Rugby union
Tennis
Cycling
Golf
Boxing
Rugby league
Racing
US sports
Culture View all Culture
Film
Music
TV & radio
Books
Art & design
Stage
Games
Classical
Lifestyle View all Lifestyle
The Filter
Fashion
Food
Recipes
Travel
Health & fitness
Women
Men
Love & sex
Beauty
Home & garden
Money
Cars
Search input
google-search
Search
Support us
Print subscriptions
Search jobs
Hire with Guardian Jobs
Holidays
Live events
About Us
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Guardian Licensing
The Guardian app
Video
Podcasts
Pictures
Newsletters
Today's paper
Inside the Guardian
Guardian Weekly
Crosswords
Wordiply
Corrections
Tips
Search input
google-search
Search
Search jobs
Hire with Guardian Jobs
Holidays
Live events
About Us
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Guardian Licensing
Education
Schools
Teachers
Universities
Students
Sources say Powell wants inspectors to take greater account of the social and economic background of each school and its pupils. Photograph: Abstract Aerial Art/Getty Images
View image in fullscreen
Sources say Powell wants inspectors to take greater account of the social and economic background of each school and its pupils. Photograph: Abstract Aerial Art/Getty Images
Schools
England school inspections to be overhauled again after barrage of complaints
Exclusive: Education secretary sends Ofsted back to ‘drawing board’ as teachers raise serious concerns about new system
Kiran Stacey and Richard Adams
Fri 2 Oct 2026 17.00 BST Last modified on Fri 2 Oct 2026 17.19 BST
Share
Prefer the Guardian on Google
School inspections in England will be overhauled for the second time in a year, after a barrage of complaints that the new system was dangerously stressful and damaging teachers’ mental health.
Lucy Powell, the education secretary, will tell the schools regulator Ofsted to “go back to the drawing board” after becoming concerned that inspection changes overseen by her predecessor, Bridget Phillipson, were creating problems for headteachers.
Sources say Powell does not want to scrap the new system of ratings, which score schools from “exceptional” to needing “urgent improvement” in six key areas, but she does want inspectors to take greater account of the social and economic background of each school and its pupils.
New Ofsted inspection regime is damaging our health, headteachers say
Read more
Powell’s changes, which will be communicated to Ofsted in the coming weeks, will be the second set of major alterations to the school inspection regime in just over a year, after Labour’s election manifesto pledge to replace the previous inspection framework in the wake of the death of the headteacher Ruth Perry .
One source said: “She wants Ofsted to go back to the drawing board when it comes to measuring inclusion in particular. That’s where most of the problems seem to lie.”
Powell’s changes will mean a significant shift from those carried out by Phillipson, who is now equalities minister and party chair.
The two MPs fought an occasionally bitter contest to become Labour’s deputy leader last year, during which allies of each traded insults and accusations. Andy Burnham promoted Powell, a long-term ally, to Phillipson’s job as education secretary when he entered Downing Street earlier this year.
Powell told an event at last week’s Labour party conference: “I want to see a much stronger emphasis in the current inspection regime on context, much stronger than it is at the moment.
“I think this is one of those areas that it’s not straightforward to sort of move the oil tanker around massively quickly, but we absolutely do need to see reforms there.”
View image in fullscreen
Lucy Powell on stage with Andy Burnham at the Labour party conference. Photograph: Victoria Jones/Shutterstock Ofsted declined to comment. The inspectorate has commissioned its own independent evaluation of the new framework, with an interim report due out later this year.
Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said he was encouraged that ministers were listening to the criticism of inspections being raised by parents and experts as well as teachers.
Whiteman said: “We have serious concerns about fairness and comparability. Schools serve very different communities and face very different levels of challenge. Leaders working in areas of greater disadvantage, or with higher numbers of pupils with special educational needs (Send) and disabilities, must not be placed at a systemic disadvantage by an inspection framework that fails to properly reflect those contexts.
“Inspection should take account of the circumstances in which schools are operating, while recognising the tremendous work many are doing to support children facing the greatest barriers.
“There is a need for an inspection system that is rigorous and proportionate and which genuinely supports school improvement.”
The new “report card” system came into force last year , replacing Ofsted’s headline inspection grades of “outstanding” to “inadequate”, with a more detailed system intended to put less pressure on schools.
The new system was initially welcomed by teachers, though criticised by others who warned it would make it harder for parents to judge a school.
Since its implementation however, the regime has been met with a flurry of complaints from school leaders, who say it is harming their mental health and creating greater stress than the system it replaced.
Perry’s sister, Prof Julia Waters, said last month that she had been contacted by at least a dozen teachers left “feeling suicidal” by Ofsted inspections, and raised her concerns in a letter to the prime minister.
Amanda Hulme, the headteacher of Claypool primary school in Bolton, told the Guardian last month that her most recent Ofsted inspection was the most stressful experience of her career.
Unions have called for teachers to be given “urgent relief” from the new system, while some want Ofsted to stop grading their schools altogether.
A survey of school staff inspected under the new regime found that two-thirds said it was as bad or worse than the framework it had replaced. The survey of National Education Union members also found that three out of four said the inspections had negatively affected their mental health, with one primary school teacher describing it as “a circle of stress and fear”.
Ofsted drops ‘clumsy’ and ‘offensive’ guidance linking autism and extremism
Read more
Powell is understood to be concerned that schools in more “challenging” contexts are doing worse under the new system.
A recent study by the former Ofsted inspector Steve Wren found schools with higher levels of children receiving free school meals (a key test of poverty) or Send support were receiving lower ratings than average.
Wren also found that ratings for secondary schools were closely correlated with how well pupils had performed before they joined the school, suggesting inspectors were not taking sufficient account of previous attainment levels.
Wren said in his analysis: “Do these grades represent the reality that secondary schools with lower prior attainment are doing a markedly worse job of educating their pupils, or is the framework biased against them, or are inspectors not skilled at spotting strengths in such contexts?”
Explore more on these topics Schools
Ofsted
Lucy Powell
Education policy
Teachers' workload
England
news
Share
Reuse this content
More on this story
More on this story
New Ofsted inspection regime is damaging our health, headteachers say
21 Sept 2026
Northern Ireland schools must give girls option to wear trousers from next year
11 Sept 2026
Ofsted drops ‘clumsy’ and ‘offensive’ guidance linking autism and extremism
5 Jul 2026
Mail on Sunday ends up funding state school scholarship via payout to MP
11 Sept 2026
Ofsted inspections pushing headteachers to ‘point of destruction’, union chief says
1 May 2026
England’s teenagers outperform peers in most countries in maths, reading and science
8 Sept 2026
Headteachers’ union considers strikes after judge rejects case against Ofsted
3 Nov 2025
‘Our children are less cognitively capable,’ says neuroscientist who wants to cut screen use in schools
16 Aug 2026
Ofsted to press ahead with new inspection regime despite opposition
8 Sept 2025
Private schools offer 41% more tree shade than state schools in England
16 Jul 2026
Most viewed
Most viewed
Education
Schools
Teachers
Universities
Students
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Modern Slavery Act
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Patrons
Work with us
Accessibility settings
Back to top
© 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)
