URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ckp848925lgmo
BBC News NI, published Fri 2 Oct 2026 16:59 BST

Drumcree: Major public safety operation gets under way as NI Secretary appeals for calm

Assistant Chief Constable Ryan Henderson said the PSNI was doing \"everything we can to maintain order and ensure the safety of everyone in that area\"

Ryan Henderson, a man wearing a white shirt. He has a shaved head and stubble.

The Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) has said a \"major public safety operation\" will continue in Portadown this weekend.

The PSNI is \"continuing to seek safe and peaceful compliance with the Parades Commission determination\" at Drumcree and said its \"investigation into anyone suspected of breaking the law related to this dispute is continuing at pace\".

Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Chris Bryant \"urged calm this weekend\" and said \"everyone across Northern Ireland wants a peaceful resolution to the situation\".

On Wednesday, the PSNI chief constable said there would be an investigation after protesters blocked the mainly nationalist road to prevent an Orange Order parade from happening.

DUP leader Gavin Robinson said there has to be \"consequences\" to \"people who are law makers who are acting as law breakers\"

Assistant Chief Constable Ryan Henderson said the PSNI was doing \"everything we can to maintain order and ensure the safety of everyone in that area\".

\"I want to thank those officers from Police Services in England and Scotland who have been in Northern Ireland supporting our efforts over the past week,\" he added.

\"Finally, I want to repeat the Chief Constable's appeal for calm and for all parties to refocus efforts on working to find a lasting resolution to this issue.\"

Protesters remain on Garvaghy Road and the Orange Order has maintained a presence at Drumcree church after talks to end the parading dispute ended without agreement.

The Orange Order's Portadown District said on Friday that its position \"has been clear from the outset: we set out to complete our parade through lawful and peaceful means, and despite the provocation and threats we have faced, it remains our firm intention to continue on that path\".

\"Our community has demonstrated considerable restraint, dignity and patience, and we strongly encourage everyone to continue conducting themselves lawfully and peacefully,\" it added in a social media post.

It said \"rounds of talks with the Secretary of State concluded last night without agreement\" and the \"District is now carefully assessing the position and considering its next steps over the coming days\".

The statement added that it remains \"committed to pursuing a lawful and peaceful resolution\".

The Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) leader Gavin Robinson said he expects the criminal investigation into the unlawful blocking of Garvaghy Road to begin next week.

Earlier, Robinson said there had to be \"consequences\" for \"people who are law makers who are acting as law breakers\".

First Minister Michelle O'Neill was among those who attended the protest. She has said she understands the law, but chose to \"stand in solidarity\" with residents.

Robinson said he expected the investigation to begin next week \"but it needs the space to see it conclude as well\".

The fallout over the proposed Orange Order march - which is opposed by residents of the Garvaghy Road - has lasted since Sunday morning.

A fresh legal bid by the residents to prevent the march was due to be heard on Friday - but has now been postponed until Monday.

Orangemen and Garvaghy Road residents met Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Chris Bryant at Hillsborough Castle on Thursday night but did not break their deadlock.

Speaking after Thursday night's talks, Sir Chris told reporters: \"I think this is the end of these conversations.

\"We haven't come to a settled agreement and it's a shame but my door remains open.\"

Breándan Mac Cionnaith, the chairman of the Garvaghy Road Residents' Coalition, said there had been no \"meeting of minds\".

Nigel Dawson, the Orange Order's Portadown district master, said it \"remains as it has been\".

Sir Chris Bryant says he is open to hosting further talks

On Friday morning, about 20 protesters were gathered on the Garvaghy Road.

About a mile away at Drumcree Church, five members of the Orange Order were present.

The rector of Drumcree Church has said that he has received hundreds of \"extremely nasty\" emails, texts and calls in recent days.

In a post on Facebook, the Reverend Gary Galway said: \"Social media has given a platform for individuals to express themselves without restraint, or the integrity of a face-to-face civil discussion.\"

Analysis: Momentum lost after failed talks

Hopes of a resolution to the Drumcree dispute have faded but have not disappeared completely.

By engaging in a four-day talks process, the two sides have shown a willingness to try to negotiate an agreement.

Further discussions at some stage are still possible. Some might say they are inevitable.

However, momentum has been lost and the danger is that the problem now just festers for days, months or even years.

That would be bad for community relations and a strain on police resources as they keep a round-the-clock watch on Drumcree hill and the Garvaghy Road.

For all concerned, a difficult road lies ahead.

Councillors reported to standards watchdog

The stalemate has reopened what was once the most bitter parading dispute in Northern Ireland, with stand-offs in the mid-to-late 1990s accompanied by riots, roadblocks and killings.

In 1998, the newly-established Parades Commission, which adjudicates on marching disputes, ruled that the Orange Order should not march down the road - a decision that was upheld for the past 28 years.

But last week the Parades Commission decided that the parade could go ahead on Sunday morning with restrictions in place.

That prompted a large protest on the Garvaghy Road, preventing the Orange Order from marching.

Thirteen councillors have been reported to the local government standards watchdog over conduct surrounding the parading dispute.