URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2026/oct/02/palestine-action-crowdfunder-supreme-court-challenge-blocked-us-sanctions
The Guardian | published 2 Oct 2026 15:00 BST, last modified 2 Oct 2026 18:02 BST

Palestine Action crowdfunder for UK supreme court challenge blocked due to US sanctions | Palestine Action | The Guardian
Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 2 Next image Previous image Toggle caption
Print subscriptions
Search jobs
Sign in
UK UK edition
US edition
Australia edition
Europe edition
International edition
The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more Hide expanded menu
News View all News
UK news
US politics
World news
Climate crisis
Middle East
Ukraine
Football
Newsletters
Business
Environment
UK politics
Science
Tech
Global development
Obituaries
Opinion View all Opinion
The Guardian view
Columnists
Cartoons
Opinion videos
Letters
Sport View all Sport
Football
Cricket
Rugby union
Tennis
Cycling
Golf
Boxing
Rugby league
Racing
US sports
Culture View all Culture
Film
Music
TV & radio
Books
Art & design
Stage
Games
Classical
Lifestyle View all Lifestyle
The Filter
Fashion
Food
Recipes
Travel
Health & fitness
Women
Men
Love & sex
Beauty
Home & garden
Money
Cars
Search input
google-search
Search
Support us
Print subscriptions
Search jobs
Hire with Guardian Jobs
Holidays
Live events
About Us
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Guardian Licensing
The Guardian app
Video
Podcasts
Pictures
Newsletters
Today's paper
Inside the Guardian
Guardian Weekly
Crosswords
Wordiply
Corrections
Tips
Search input
google-search
Search
Search jobs
Hire with Guardian Jobs
Holidays
Live events
About Us
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Guardian Licensing
UK politics
Education
Media
Society
Law
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
The court of appeal has overturned the high court’s decision that the ban on Palestine Action was unlawful; the case moves to the supreme court in November. Photograph: Martin Godwin/The Guardian
View image in fullscreen
The court of appeal has overturned the high court’s decision that the ban on Palestine Action was unlawful; the case moves to the supreme court in November. Photograph: Martin Godwin/The Guardian
Palestine Action
Palestine Action crowdfunder for UK supreme court challenge blocked due to US sanctions
Exclusive: CrowdJustice platform says US firm Stripe, its payment processor, ‘cannot support accounts or transactions’ linked to group
Haroon Siddique Legal affairs correspondent
Fri 2 Oct 2026 15.00 BST Last modified on Fri 2 Oct 2026 18.02 BST
Share
Prefer the Guardian on Google
An online crowdfunder to raise money for the UK supreme court challenge to the ban on Palestine Action has been blocked as a result of US sanctions against the direct action group.
CrowdJustice, a UK company, has declined to host a fundraiser for legal fees to fight proscription because the platform uses the US company Stripe as its payment processor.
In an email seen by the Guardian, CrowdJustice said Stripe had confirmed “that it cannot support accounts or transactions linked to, or for the benefit of, Palestine Action . This includes circumstances where funds are being raised for legal proceedings.”
The US sanctions were imposed last month by Donald Trump, using powers introduced by President George W Bush in 2001 shortly after the 9/11 attacks by al-Qaida on the twin towers in New York.
Huda Ammori, a co-founder of Palestine Action, who has brought the legal challenge against the UK ban, said: “Due to CrowdJustice’s and other platforms’ reliance on US services, we are unable to fundraise for legal fees needed for our supreme court challenge.
“On the other hand, the state continues to spend millions of pounds to cover their legal costs to defend the disproportionate and draconian ban, which has led to more than 3,700 arrests for holding signs [allegedly supporting a proscribed organisation]. The British government and the US are putting every possible obstacle in our way, in order to stack the odds against us.”
View image in fullscreen
Huda Ammori, a co-founder of Palestine Action, said the group was ‘unable to fundraise for legal fees needed for our supreme court challenge’. Photograph: Abdullah Bailey/Alamy The Home Office has spent £700,000 defending proscription in the high court, according to the Independent . The total amount spent by the government will be far higher as the case has since been heard by the court of appeal , which overturned the high court’s decision that the ban was unlawful , and moves to the UK’s highest court in November.
When the then home secretary, Yvette Cooper, announced her intention to ban Palestine Action under UK law in June last year, placing the group alongside the likes of Islamic State and Boko Haram, a CrowdJustice fundraiser for legal fees to fund a high court challenge raised more than £300,000 within days.
Ammori said: “Clearly, the powerful have banded together against citizens acting on their conscience against the Israeli war machine and ethnic cleansing of Palestine. It is extremely clear that Palestine Action faces harsher sanctions than Israel.
“The supreme court case is extremely important for our rights to free speech in Britain, but also for the people of Palestine. If we are successful, all prosecutions of protesters who held signs will be rightfully quashed. If not, we will witness thousands of people facing jail for holding placards.”
skip past newsletter promotion Free newsletter | Every day
Sign up to Headlines UK
Get the day’s headlines and highlights emailed direct to you every morning
Enter your email
Sign up
after newsletter promotion
The former British diplomat Craig Murray, who is separately challenging the legality of the ban on Palestine Action in Scotland , had his own CrowdJustice fundraiser for legal fees taken down after the US designated the group as a global terrorist organisation.
“It’s really disgraceful,” Murray said. “Not only do you have draconian legislation with the proscription of Palestine Action affecting freedom of speech but you’ve then got moves to cripple our ability to fight it legally through the courts, which is just adding injustice to injustice.”
Stripe said it did not comment on individual users. CrowdJustice was also approached for comment.
Explore more on these topics Palestine Action
Protest
Crowdfunding
Freedom of speech
news
Share
Reuse this content
Most viewed
Most viewed
UK politics
Education
Media
Society
Law
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Modern Slavery Act
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Patrons
Work with us
Accessibility settings
Back to top
© 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)
