URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c623dlk4y75mo
BBC News, published Fri 2 Oct 2026 15:30 BST

Spanish PM Sánchez loses key housing crisis vote after eviction of woman, 87

Before his bruising defeat, Pedro Sánchez made a last-ditch appeal to allies to back changes to the law

Spain's Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez dressed in a grey jacket and tie delivers a speech during an extraordinary parliamentary session to vote on a government housing decree on Octrober 2, 2026 at the Congress of Deputies in Madrid.

Spain's Congress has rejected a series of measures aimed at tackling the country's housing crisis, in a defeat for the government of Pedro Sánchez that increases pressure on him to call a snap election.

Lawmakers voted on two decree-laws presented by the government in response to nationwide protests that have followed the eviction of an 87-year-old woman, Maricarmen Abascal, from her home.

The decrees, which introduced a series of initiatives aimed at protecting tenants in the rental market, required parliamentary approval in order to remain in place.

MPs rejected the first decree by 178 votes to 172 and voted against the second by 184 to 166.

Hundreds of demonstrators had gathered outside Congress as the debate took place and there were angry scenes.

Protesters chanted \"shame on you\" and \"your profits, our misery\", after the results were announced.

The government's defeat underlines the fact that Sánchez, a Socialist, does not command a congressional majority and it has heightened speculation that he might call an early general election, which was not due until next summer.

Sources told Spanish media that the government would spend the weekend deciding its next step, and whether to dissolve parliament.

Sánchez's beleaguered government had already been mired in a series of scandals and judicial cases affecting his Socialist Party and close allies.

Maricarmen Abascal, 87, was evicted from her flat but later told she could return

Abascal was evicted after she was unable to pay a sharp rent increase introduced by Urbagestión, the company that owned her flat in central Madrid.

Hundreds of protesters gathered to oppose the eviction last week and the case triggered a broader movement across the country demanding affordable rentals, which have soared in recent years.

The social backlash has seen Urbagestión negotiate the return of Abascal to her flat on a low rent. However, protests have continued, with people occupying squares in Madrid and other cities, pitching tents in squares and with a series of marches scheduled for this weekend.

Maricarmen Abascal's eviction last week triggered protests demanding an end to the housing crisis

The Sindicato de Inquilinas (Tenants' Union) activist association which has been co-ordinating protests, announced during the congressional debate that it was abandoning the tent protest in central Madrid. It said it wanted to \"take the struggle to all the neighbourhoods, residential blocks and homes of Madrid, wherever there are rental increases, expulsions and abuses each day, and turn the energy of the last few days into a permanent organisation\".

Protesters are also calling for a general strike over the housing crisis.

The left-wing coalition government responded to the social anger by hurriedly drawing up the two decree-laws in an effort to defuse the protests.

The first decree included the suspension of evictions of vulnerable tenants until 2030, a two-year extension to rental leases due to expire before 2028, tax increases for tourist apartments, and a restriction on the purchase of residential properties by what the government calls \"vulture funds\".

The second decree was more controversial, because it included the automatic renewal of rental contracts, a major demand of many on the left and the Sindicato de Inquilinas.

The conservative People's Party (PP) and far-right Vox had already said they would vote against both initiatives, leaving the minority government depending on the support of smaller nationalist parties in Catalonia and the Basque Country.

However, by the eve of the parliamentary session, the centre-right, pro-independence Together for Catalonia (JxCat) had signalled its opposition to both laws, condemning them to failure.

Friday's debate was fierce and at times angry, as supporters and opponents of the decrees clashed in Congress.

\"I don't ask you, I beg you to be brave and consistent,\" Sánchez said, moments before the two votes took place. \"Because they are not just ambitious measures, they are necessary\".

He appealed to lawmakers \"to put order and humanity into [the housing] market, because if we don't, it will bring down our society\".

Social Affairs minister Pablo Bustinduy, of the Sumar alliance, the junior partner in the governing coalition, presented the debate in dramatic terms.

\"Today is about defending an international oligarchy which is extracting the rent from salaries earned with the effort of working classes of this country in order to share it out with dividends and they don't even pay taxes in Spain,\" he said.

\"Voting against these decrees today means defending the interests of this oligarchy and turning your back on your own people.\"

However, Miriam Nogueras, of JxCat, said the decrees had been hastily drawn up and lacked rigour.

She said the decrees \"will allow [vulture] funds to keep buying, keep speculating and evictions to keep happening… these two decrees would provoke the opposite effect of what they aim to achieve.\"

The political right has argued that the government's attempts to intervene will frighten homeowners, causing them not to put their properties on the rental market and pushing prices up further.

Juan Bravo of the PP said \"housing doesn't get cheaper with decrees, it gets cheaper with more homes\".

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.

Former Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson recalls his recovery from the near-fatal brain haemorrhage he suffered in 2018.

READ MORE: Ferguson on being 'terrified' by brain haemorrhage and 'fantastic' return to Man Utd

Follow for live updates on this story.

Guillem Balague on why Ronaldo walked out after being left on the bench

More on the new driving changes.

Anthony Joshua reassures fans that he will be in the ring to fight Tyson Fury in December.

White casts doubt on Fury-Joshua after 24 hours of chaos