URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cr0j3jdj64x7o
BBC News Wales | published 1 Oct 2026 23:00 BST, updated 2 Oct 2026 16:40 BST

First minister demands 'new deal' from Andy Burnham to make Wales equal with Scotland - BBC News BBC Homepage
Skip to content
Accessibility Help
Your account
Notifications
Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sounds
Bitesize
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
More menu
More menu
Search BBC
Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sounds
Bitesize
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
Close menu
BBC News
Menu
Home
World
Business
Culture
Politics
Health
Tech
InDepth
BBC Verify
Climate
More
Science
Family & Education
In Pictures
Disability
Newsbeat
Wales
Wales Politics
Wales Business
North West
North East
Mid
South West
South East
Cymru
First minister demands 'new deal' from Andy Burnham to make Wales equal with Scotland
To play this video you need to enable JavaScript in your browser.
This video can not be played
Figure caption, First Minister Rhun ap Iorwerth told Prime Minister Andy Burnham "do not undermine Wales"
By David Deans ,  Wales political reporter   and   Cemlyn Davies ,  Wales political correspondent
Published
1 October 2026
1115 Comments
Updated 1 hour ago
First Minister Rhun ap Iorwerth has demanded a "new deal" for Wales from the UK government that would put the country on an equal footing with Scotland.
In a letter he said powers over policing, justice, rail and the Crown Estate should be transferred to Cardiff.
Speaking at Plaid Cymru's conference in Llandudno, the party's leader said Prime Minister Andy Burnham has promised him he would not undermine Wales.
Ap Iorwerth is expected to meet the prime minister, along with the first ministers of Scotland and Northern Ireland, at the end of the month.
The UK government said it was "committed to building a stronger and fairer Wales in a stronger and fairer United Kingdom".
Plaid Cymru is gathering in Llandudno's Venue Cymru for the first time since it won a historic victory at the Senedd election in May .
The party had won power for the first time, ending Labour's 27 year control of the Welsh government.
Ap Iorwerth said the result amounted to a "new dawn" for Wales, and "the beginning of our work to give flight to a nation whose wings have been clipped for far too long."
But he warned that the upcoming Welsh government budget process would be "tough", and said he would have to "find savings where we can".
Image source, PA Media
Image caption, Ap Iorwerth has demanded a "new deal" for Wales from the UK government
The Plaid leader said his meeting with Burnham at the Commonwealth Games "did leave me feeling positive - here we had an experienced devolutionist who wanted to bring power and people closer together.
"But as the weeks went on, it became increasingly clear that the prime minister's wave of new powers risked crashing against Offa's Dyke."
He accused Burnham of having a "devolution programme for England".
Speaking to party activists, ap Iorwerth said: "I've looked him in the eyes and said do not undermine Wales as a nation. Do not bypass our Senedd. And he looked me in the eyes and promised he would not. I will hold him to that."
Scotland's government and parliament has more control over the country's own affairs than Wales, where policing and justice are controlled in Westminster, and not Cardiff, and where rail is largely devolved.
Ap Iorwerth said his proposed "new deal" would "redress the historic unfairness of our fiscal and constitutional settlement and put Wales on an equal footing with Scotland as a bare minimum".
"It remains my hope that the prime minister will listen in a shared spirit, and that he'll see that the respect agenda between the Welsh and UK governments must work both ways," he said.
"If he fails, Wales will know again that our best interests will never be served by Westminster, and that it matters little whether who lives in Number 10 Downing Street is an Evertonian or an Old Etonian."
Ap Iorwerth has sent a 2,000 word letter to Burnham spelling out his requests.
Image source, PA Media
Image caption, Rhun ap Iorwerth became first minister after Plaid Cymru won the Senedd election in May
Plaid Cymru won the largest number of seats at May's election , and since the defection of Sarah Cooper-Lessad it has 44 in the Welsh Parliament chamber.
It is five short of a majority, and needs the help of at least one other party group to pass its spending plans next year . It has been in talks with Labour, the Tories and Reform.
Ap Iorwerth acknowledged a "difficult economic and fiscal backdrop" and said it would be a "tight budget".
"There will be difficult decisions. The budget arithmetic requires us to be disciplined and resourceful."
He added there was a need for a "serious and collaborative approach with other parties".
"We'll have to drive efficiency, improve productivity and find savings where we can; through consolidating and streamlining services, avoiding duplication and focusing on outcomes."
But he said that had to be "free of the damaging approach of the parties on the right", accusing them of defining "savings" and waste by "ideology".
He said the UK government's forthcoming autumn budget was a chance to "reverse the planned-real terms cuts" to the Welsh government's own spending.
Plaid has long-called for Wales to receive substantial extra funds for rail. Ap Iorwerth said that should come "now, not the 2030s".
In another attack on rivals, he asked "others in sincerity to consider whose side they are on".
"Whose side are they on when it comes to protecting Wales from the poison of the far-right," he said.
Image source, South Wales Fire and Rescue Service
Image caption, Firefighters had been tackling wildfires for weeks across Wales over the summer, including this one at Llanwonno Mountain above Ferndale
The party leader paid tribute to fire services who fought the summer's wildfires , and said he would "not allow my government to burden my children and your children with the destructive legacy of complacency on climate change".
He said they had provided an "immediate cash injection to prioritise the longest NHS waits", and had moved "quickly to begin the rollout of the most generous childcare offer anywhere in the UK".
The party eventually plans to roll out childcare to children as young as nine months before the next election.
The first minister said his government was "determined" to tackle problems in the NHS, saying "too many aspects of the service are unfair on patients and on our brilliant staff" and are "unsustainable for the future", although he acknowledged he could not change the NHS "overnight".
He said he would not "shy away" from tackling child poverty "because of a difficult economic and fiscal backdrop".
Labour's Burnham has promised to end triple lock for pensions from 2030 to fund a new national care service. The idea appeared to win praise from Plaid ministers on Friday.
Social care is the responsibility of the Welsh government, and how it spends its money is up to its ministers. Both Plaid and Burnham would face elections before the policy would come in.
Plaid Cymru promised to "make progress" on delivering a national care service in its manifesto for the Senedd election.
Speaking to BBC Radio Wales Breakfast , the Plaid leader suggested that he may spend extra funds that come to the Welsh government, if any came as a result of more social care in England.
Ap Iorwerth said Burnham's policy was a "good direction of travel", but he added: "We don't know what the consequentials will be."
At a conference fringe, the deputy minister for social care, Delyth Jewell, said Burnham's announcement was "very brave" and that a Plaid Cymru Welsh government would "have to work with the UK government on this".
But she said the building blocks were already being put in place in Wales.
Image source, Getty Images
Image caption, The leaders of the SNP, Plaid Cymru and Sinn Féin met in Cardiff last month
Burnham had previously said he would be "open" to the idea of giving the Welsh government control over policing.
He has also said : "I have to respect the governments in the nations of the UK, and I will, and give a fair hearing to anything that is put to me."
A UK government spokesperson said: "This government is committed to building a stronger and fairer Wales in a stronger and fairer United Kingdom.
"That's why our focus is now on working with the Welsh government to empower local leaders and communities to deliver good growth and jobs in every postcode."
Related topics
Plaid Cymru
Rhun ap Iorwerth
Wales
Welsh government
More top stories
We fear for our lives after being told our abusive exes will be freed from jail early
Published
1 day ago
Body of baby girl may have been in the water for weeks, police say
Published
1 day ago
My husband suffered in his final days after catching scabies in hospital
Published
1 day ago
Comments can not be loaded
To load Comments you need to enable JavaScript in your browser
View comments | 1115
The video playlist
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
Previous Next
1:32 Is UK politics 'boomer-centric'? 00:01:32, play video Is UK politics 'boomer-centric'?
1:28 Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever? 00:01:28, play video Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever?
1:01 ‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video ‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
1:23 Masked men brutally attack cryptocurrency investor and wife. 00:01:23, play video Masked men brutally attack cryptocurrency investor and wife
0:38 Ferguson on recovery from brain haemorrhage. 00:00:38, play video Ferguson on recovery from brain haemorrhage
1:44 Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank. 00:01:44, play video Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank
1:23 How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics. 00:01:23, play video How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics
1:45 Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack. 00:01:45, play video Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack
0:54 Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home. 00:00:54, play video Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home
1:05 Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man. 00:01:05, play video Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man
0:55 Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries. 00:00:55, play video Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries
1:15 What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution. 00:01:15, play video What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution
1:12 Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp? 00:01:12, play video Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp?
0:54 New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI. 00:00:54, play video New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI
0:59 What makes you socially anxious? 00:00:59, play video What makes you socially anxious?
0:38 AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen... 00:00:38, play video AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen...
1:01 Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when? 00:01:01, play video Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when?
0:44 Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school. 00:00:44, play video Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school
Top stories
Live .  G7 to release up to 100 million barrels of diesel and crude oil in bid to stop soaring prices
7391 viewing 7.4k viewing
Riot police clash with students as education protests rage in France
Published
47 minutes ago
Watch: Why students in France are protesting
Published
2 hours ago
More to explore
What's really going on with the lymphatic drainage beauty trend videos?
Chaos, coffins and 'Claudiapatra' steal the show in Celebrity Traitors
Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case. Video Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case
What happened in the failed execution of Christa Pike - and what next?
Weekly quiz: How did two champions fight over marathon dates for next year's London races?
Watch: Endangered moths swarming Australia's east coast. Video Watch: Endangered moths swarming Australia's east coast
Ferguson 'terrified' before 'fantastic' return to Man Utd after brain haemorrhage
Attribution
Sport
Farming award joy for teen inspired by late grandad
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
loading elsewhere stories
Most read
1 I've seen nearly 500 executions - but never one like Christa Pike's
2 Alison Hammond has heart check-up in hospital after leaving TV's This Morning
3 Woman who killed abusive partner has murder conviction overturned
4 Dolly Parton sings Jolene in Welsh in recording released after her death
5 Woman at centre of Cornell rape inquiry was 'failed' by officials, says New York governor
6 Riot police clash with students as education protests rage in France
7 LFB named in Met's evidence file on Grenfell fire
8 Two people dead after workplace incident near rural road
9 Son of ex-Chelsea player died in 40C desert hike
10 Parents say toddler found in middle of main road after wandering off from nursery
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On smart speakers
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Movie Magic on BBC iPlayer
What, like it's hard? Noughties rom-com starring Reese Witherspoon
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Legally Blonde to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Legally Blonde has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Brad Pitt leads a US tank crew on a dangerous mission in WWII
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Fury to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Fury has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Comedy drama charting the fight for women's equal pay in 1968
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Made in Dagenham to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Made in Dagenham has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Oscar-winning psychological thriller star
