URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/crz98wpqglkeo
BBC News, published Fri 2 Oct 2026 17:04 BST

LFB named in Met's evidence file on Grenfell fire

A file has been passed to the CPS which will consider whether any charges will be brought

A tower block covered in white wrapping. There is a sign on top saying 'Grenfell - forever in our hearts'

London Fire Brigade (LFB) and a tenants' association have confirmed they are among those facing possible criminal action over the Grenfell Tower fire.

Prosecutors were handed an evidence file on 20 organisations and firms and 54 individuals from the Metropolitan Police earlier this week.

LFB and Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation (KCTMO) have been criticised for failings relating to the fire and will find out next year if they will be prosecuted.

The Met is seeking charges including corporate manslaughter, gross negligence manslaughter, health and safety offences and fraud offences over the deaths of 72 people in the 2017 disaster.

The Met's investigation - Operation Northleigh - began soon after the fire in June 2017 and has involved hundreds of investigating officers.

The CPS said any charging decisions would be made before the 10th anniversary of the disaster in 2027.

In a statement, the LFB said: \"The London fire commissioner has been notified by the Metropolitan Police Service that, following its investigation into the events surrounding the Grenfell Tower fire, a file has been submitted to the CPS for its consideration in respect of London Fire Brigade.

\"The London fire commissioner welcomes the progress in the investigation process and reaffirms his commitment to providing the CPS with full cooperation, as LFB has sought to do throughout Operation Northleigh.\"

Smith said: \"We remember the 72 people who lost their lives, and our thoughts remain with the bereaved, survivors and everyone whose lives were changed forever by that night.

\"We continue working with our partners across government and the fire and rescue sector to ensure the lessons of the Grenfell tragedy are learnt, and this continues to shape everything we do.\"

KCTMO, facing corporate manslaughter charges, said: \"We remain acutely conscious of the terrible impact of the Grenfell Tower fire on the bereaved, survivors, their relatives and the wider Grenfell community, and continue to offer our deepest condolences and sympathies to all those affected.\"

LFB crew regularly join justice campaigners on annual events near the tower

Most of the organisations facing potential prosecution have not been named.

Among those that have been revealed so far are the local authority Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea (RBKC), which could be prosecuted for three offences: corporate manslaughter, section 3 of Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, and acting contrary to the Regulatory Reform (fire safety) Order 2005.

The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government, which is responsible for building safety, is also among those referred to the CPS.

The fire started in the kitchen of a fourth floor flat and then spread rapidly on the outside of the building via combustible cladding.

A public inquiry found the fire was avoidable and set out how a chain of failures across government and the private sector led to the disaster.

In a report following the first phase of the inquiry, chair Sir Martin Moore-Bick condemned LFB's \"serious shortcomings\" and systemic failures in its response to the fire.

He concluded that fewer people would have died in the blaze if the LFB had taken certain actions earlier.

LFB said it had accepted the findings of the inquiry and had implemented all the recommendations from both phases.

Grenfell United, a bereaved families and survivors group, has previously criticised the time frame for prosecutions.

Earlier this week, the group said: \"It has taken more than nine years to get here. Nine years, and no-one has been held criminally accountable for the deaths of our 72 loved ones.

\"We want those responsible to face justice.\"

Listen to the best of BBC Radio London on Sounds and follow BBC London on Facebook, X and Instagram. Send your story ideas to hello.bbclondon@bbc.co.uk

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.

More on the new series of The Celebrity Traitors.

Watch our video on how much people tip in New York vs London.

Former Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson recalls his recovery from the near-fatal brain haemorrhage he suffered in 2018.

READ MORE: Ferguson on being 'terrified' by brain haemorrhage and 'fantastic' return to Man Utd

Follow for live updates on this story.

Guillem Balague on why Ronaldo walked out after being left on the bench

More on the new driving changes.

Anthony Joshua reassures fans that he will be in the ring to fight Tyson Fury in December.

White casts doubt on Fury-Joshua after 24 hours of chaos