URL: https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2026/oct/02/welsh-first-minister-rhun-ap-iorwerth-andy-burnham-devolution-wales-plaid-cymru
The Guardian | 2 Oct 2026

Welsh first minister calls on Burnham to deliver ‘new deal’ on devolution | Rhun ap Iorwerth | The Guardian
Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 2 Next image Previous image Toggle caption
Print subscriptions
Search jobs
Sign in
UK UK edition
US edition
Australia edition
Europe edition
International edition
The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more Hide expanded menu
News View all News
UK news
US politics
World news
Climate crisis
Middle East
Ukraine
Football
Newsletters
Business
Environment
UK politics
Science
Tech
Global development
Obituaries
Opinion View all Opinion
The Guardian view
Columnists
Cartoons
Opinion videos
Letters
Sport View all Sport
Football
Cricket
Rugby union
Tennis
Cycling
Golf
Boxing
Rugby league
Racing
US sports
Culture View all Culture
Film
Music
TV & radio
Books
Art & design
Stage
Games
Classical
Lifestyle View all Lifestyle
The Filter
Fashion
Food
Recipes
Travel
Health & fitness
Women
Men
Love & sex
Beauty
Home & garden
Money
Cars
Search input
google-search
Search
Support us
Print subscriptions
Search jobs
Hire with Guardian Jobs
Holidays
Live events
About Us
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Guardian Licensing
The Guardian app
Video
Podcasts
Pictures
Newsletters
Today's paper
Inside the Guardian
Guardian Weekly
Crosswords
Wordiply
Corrections
Tips
Search input
google-search
Search
Search jobs
Hire with Guardian Jobs
Holidays
Live events
About Us
Digital Archive
Guardian Print Shop
Patrons
Guardian Licensing
UK politics
Education
Media
Society
Law
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
Rhun ap Iorwerth told the annual conference on Friday his government had a ‘clear mandate’ for devolving more powers from Westminster. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA
View image in fullscreen
Rhun ap Iorwerth told the annual conference on Friday his government had a ‘clear mandate’ for devolving more powers from Westminster. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA
Rhun ap Iorwerth
Welsh first minister calls on Burnham to deliver ‘new deal’ on devolution
Rhun ap Iorwerth tells Plaid Cymru conference he asked PM to ‘put Wales on equal footing with Scotland as bare minimum’
Bethan McKernan Wales correspondent
Fri 2 Oct 2026 16.06 BST Last modified on Fri 2 Oct 2026 17.10 BST
Share
Prefer the Guardian on Google
The Welsh first minister has formally called on Andy Burnham to deliver a “new deal” in his first address to a Plaid Cymru annual conference since taking office.
Rhun ap Iorwerth told party members during a keynote speech in Llandudno on Friday that his government had a “clear mandate” for devolving more powers from Westminster.
The first minister, who beat Labour to lead his nationalist party to a first victory in Senedd elections in May, said he had written to Burnham on Thursday to ask the prime minister for “a new deal to redress the historic unfairness of our fiscal and constitutional settlement and to put Wales on an equal footing with Scotland as a bare minimum”.
After being greeted by delegates with a standing ovation, ap Iorwerth said: “A new deal – the first of its kind – whereby a Welsh first minister invites the UK government to genuinely treat Wales not as a region of England but as a nation in its own right. A new deal to secure powers … not as an end in themselves but as a means of growing our economy and improving outcomes for everyone.”
The 2,000-word letter to Burnham made the case for transferring powers over policing and justice, rail infrastructure and the crown estate .
Ap Iorwerth recently told the Guardian he had been encouraged by warm initial discussions with Burnham – a stark contrast to his interactions with Keir Starmer. However, the Welsh wing of the Labour party in Westminster is generally sceptical of devolving more powers to Cardiff, especially now Labour no longer controls the Senedd.
The first minister said on Friday: “I do believe the new prime minister and I both want to have a constructive and positive relationship. I’ve looked him in the eyes and said do not undermine Wales as a nation … do not bypass our Senedd, and he looked me in the eyes and promised he would not. I will hold him to that.”
Since becoming prime minister, Burnham has made much of his support for regional devolution of power and resources in England, but his approach to the existing devolved administrations in Belfast, Cardiff and Edinburgh is still forming.
View image in fullscreen
Rhun ap Iorwerth meeting Andy Burnham for bilateral talks in Glasgow in July. Photograph: Alastair Grant/Reuters Plaid Cymru’s Welsh election win ended 100 years of Labour dominance in Wales and blocked the momentum of Nigel Farage’s Reform UK. Welsh Labour had governed in Wales since devolution began in 1999 but won just nine of the 96 seats in the new Senedd. Support for the party had been ebbing for years, driven by frustration about the management of public services, which have fallen behind the other UK nations on many metrics.
Ap Iorwerth’s win also put nationalist parties in government simultaneously in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland for the first time, although Plaid Cymru has ruled out an independence referendum during its first term.
The party’s last autumn conference in Swansea had been full of excitement as members sensed the tide turning in Welsh politics. Its first as a party of government remained more relaxed and homely than those of rivals with deeper pockets and more seats in Westminster.
The first minister’s demands for a “new deal” came a few weeks after a landmark summit of Plaid Cymru, Sinn Féin and Scottish National party leaders during which they affirmed their respective countries’ right to seek independence from the UK.
Support for independence in Scotland has hovered between 45% and 50% since the 2014 referendum. Data suggests it is rising in Wales and Northern Ireland, and stands at 32% and 36% respectively.
Burnham is expected to meet the three first ministers of the Celtic nations at the end of October.
A UK government spokesperson said: “This government is committed to building a stronger and fairer Wales in a stronger and fairer United Kingdom.
“That’s why our focus is now on working with the Welsh government to empower local leaders and communities to deliver good growth and jobs in every postcode.”
Explore more on these topics Rhun ap Iorwerth
Devolution
Plaid Cymru
Welsh government
Andy Burnham
Welsh politics
Labour
news
Share
Reuse this content
More on this story
More on this story
‘It was always the way to vote Labour here’: party’s proud Welsh heartland makes a clean break of it
17 May 2026
Westminster’s time is coming to an end, say first ministers of UK’s Celtic nations
14 Sept 2026
Leaders at Celtic summit to affirm right to seek independence from UK
13 Sept 2026
Plaid Cymru’s Rhun ap Iorwerth voted first minister of Wales
12 May 2026
Burnham to dispatch 100 Whitehall officials to help regional mayors
21 Aug 2026
double quotation mark Wales has been hit by a political earthquake – and the UK government is in a very tricky position
11 May 2026
comments
Plaid Cymru leader plans minority Welsh government built on cooperation
10 May 2026
Here be dragons: does moving power to the north work?
19 Jul 2026
Starmer warned cabinet against ‘overly deferential’ relations with devolved governments
11 Mar 2026
Plaid Cymru leader says he hopes to be made first minister as early as Tuesday
10 May 2026
Most viewed
Most viewed
UK politics
Education
Media
Society
Law
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Modern Slavery Act
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Patrons
Work with us
Accessibility settings
Back to top
© 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)
