URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c20zgjzz0e4o
BBC News | 2 Oct 2026 14:38 BST

Why UK diesel prices have breached the £2 per litre mark - BBC News BBC Homepage
Skip to content
Accessibility Help
Your account
Notifications
Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sounds
Bitesize
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
More menu
More menu
Search BBC
Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sounds
Bitesize
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
Close menu
BBC News
Menu
Home
World
Business
Culture
Politics
Health
Tech
InDepth
BBC Verify
Climate
More
Science
Family & Education
In Pictures
Disability
Newsbeat
Business
Economy
Technology of Business
AI Business
Why UK diesel prices have breached the £2 per litre mark
Image source, Maskot/Getty Images
Published
2 March 2026
495 Comments
Updated 3 hours ago
The price of diesel in the UK has breached the £2 per litre mark for the first time, as the fallout from the US-Israel war with Iran continues to drive up costs.
The average price of a litre of diesel at the pump stands at an all-time high of 200.01p, according to the RAC motoring body.
Over the past seven months, the Iran war has severely disrupted the production and transportation of oil across the region, causing the price of fuels made from crude to surge.
Motor fuel prices fell back when the US and Iran agreed in June to a framework deal to end the fighting, but rose again as tensions resurfaced.
Meanwhile, US President Donald Trump has responded to rising prices by mulling a ban on US diesel producers selling overseas - a move which could push UK prices even higher.
How do oil prices affect the cost of petrol and diesel at the pump?
Crude oil is a key ingredient in petrol and diesel, which means that higher wholesale costs make filling up a car more expensive. The price of petrol and diesel is also heavily influenced by demand and refining capacity.
Analysts say every $10 (£7.55) per barrel increase in the oil price pushes up pump prices by roughly 7p a litre.
Since the Iran war began, the price of a barrel of Brent crude – the global benchmark for wholesale oil prices – has been very volatile.
Generally speaking, news of further conflict drives the price up while hopes of an end to the war pushes the price down.
Before the Middle East conflict, Brent was trading just over $70 a barrel but the fighting saw it peak at above $120.
In early July, after the framework deal was signed, prices fell back to near the $70 mark.
The price climbed back up again after peace talks collapsed and it is now around $100 a barrel.
Why has the Iran war had a big impact on oil prices?
A lot of oil is produced in the Middle East, and the conflict has severely disrupted the production and the transportation of it, causing its price to jump.
Of particular concern to wholesale oil traders was Iran's effective closure of the Strait of Hormuz - a vital waterway south of the country through which one fifth of the world's oil and gas usually flows.
There are signs that wholesale oil transport through the strait is returning to pre-war levels, but wholesale prices remain high because traders fear this might not last.
Meanwhile, the transportation of refined oil products, such as car and plane fuel, remains down because of damage to refineries in the region and because refined products are more flammable, making them more dangerous to move during a conflict.
What has happened to petrol and diesel prices in the UK?
Before the war began, the average price of petrol was 132.83p per litre and diesel was 142.38p, according to the RAC.
Diesel is now 200.01p, the highest on record.
Meanwhile, petrol has hit an average 174.71p a litre, which is the highest in more than four years but lower than its peak of 191.5p during the summer of 2022.
Simon Williams, head of policy at the RAC, said prices at the pumps will not come down until there is a "sustained lower oil price - over several weeks, not days".
Because transporting oil is a slow process, price movements in wholesale oil markets take about a fortnight to show at the pump.
Fuel retailers have denied accusations of price gouging during the conflict. The official markets regulator said it had "not seen evidence of retailers actively changing their pricing strategies to take advantage of the crisis".
A government scheme called Fuel Finder , external lets drivers compare the cost of fuel offered by petrol stations across the UK.
In May, the then Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer said a planned 5p increase in fuel duty due in September would be postponed until the end of December because of the conflict.
Williams said that the UK government has "limited leverage when it comes to ending the US/Iran war" but lowering fuel duty further or reducing VAT could "ease the burden" at home.
How might higher diesel prices affect me?
Even if you don't drive a diesel car, you could still be hit by the rise in diesel prices.
That's because diesel is used heavily in agriculture and, crucially, in haulage.
So transporting some of our biggest essentials – particularly food – around the country is getting more expensive.
Previous episodes of high costs at the pumps have even had a knock-on effect on school transport and trips, putting pressure on councils and schools, particularly in rural areas.
No evidence of widespread fuel price-gouging, watchdog says
Published
1 May
Drivers can compare fuel prices at different petrol stations - how does it work?
Published
2 February
What would happen if the US banned diesel exports?
While Trump has suggested he might ban US producers from selling diesel overseas, he has not done it yet and views differ on how serious this threat is.
If it does happen, many agree it would hurt the countries which heavily depend on US diesel.
One such country is the UK, which depends on the US for around 17% of its diesel supplies. Other European countries also import a lot of US diesel.
As such, many worry any ban could drive UK diesel prices up even further.
And while the ban would be likely to reduce US diesel prices in the short-term, experts say it could have unintended effects that could hurt US production – and put pressure on US diesel prices – in the long-term.
Why does diesel cost more than petrol in the UK?
In the UK, we have four refineries. Between them, they make more than enough petrol to meet our needs, so we sell the rest as export.
However, they don't make enough diesel, which means we rely on imports. The closure last year of refineries in Grangemouth and Immingham has increased that reliance, meaning we now buy over half of our diesel from overseas.
In addition, the cost of importing diesel has risen because of Ukrainian attacks on Russian refineries following Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022.
Although the UK has stopped buying Russian diesel in response to the war, other countries have carried on, meaning you have "more countries competing for less diesel", the RAC's Williams says.
All of this then feeds through to prices at the pump, with diesel costing much more than petrol in the UK and the gap having widened over the last few years.
Why and how is US blockading Iranian ports in Strait of Hormuz?
Published
30 April
Oil price predicted to remain above $100 for rest of year
Published
11 May
You can also send us your questions by following this link
Reporting by Faarea Masud, Jemma Crew, Alex Daniel, Michael Race, Mitchell Labiak, Emer Moreau and Miguel Roca-Terry
Get in touch
How have you been affected by the price rises? Share your experiences
Contact form
Contact form
Get our flagship newsletter with all the headlines you need to start the day. Sign up here.
Related topics
Oil & Gas industry
Oil
Fuel
Motoring
Iran war
Air travel
Personal finance
Comments can not be loaded
To load Comments you need to enable JavaScript in your browser
View comments | 495
The video playlist
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
Previous Next
1:32 Is UK politics 'boomer-centric'? 00:01:32, play video Is UK politics 'boomer-centric'?
1:28 Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever? 00:01:28, play video Biggest The Celebrity Traitors slip-up ever?
1:01 ‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video ‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
1:23 Masked men brutally attack cryptocurrency investor and wife. 00:01:23, play video Masked men brutally attack cryptocurrency investor and wife
0:38 Ferguson on recovery from brain haemorrhage. 00:00:38, play video Ferguson on recovery from brain haemorrhage
1:44 Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank. 00:01:44, play video Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank
1:23 How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics. 00:01:23, play video How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics
1:45 Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack. 00:01:45, play video Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack
0:54 Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home. 00:00:54, play video Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home
1:05 Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man. 00:01:05, play video Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man
0:55 Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries. 00:00:55, play video Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries
1:15 What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution. 00:01:15, play video What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution
1:12 Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp? 00:01:12, play video Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp?
0:54 New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI. 00:00:54, play video New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI
0:59 What makes you socially anxious? 00:00:59, play video What makes you socially anxious?
0:38 AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen... 00:00:38, play video AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen...
1:01 Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when? 00:01:01, play video Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when?
0:44 Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school. 00:00:44, play video Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school
Top stories
Live .  G7 to release up to 100 million barrels of diesel and crude oil in bid to stop soaring prices
7918 viewing 7.9k viewing
Riot police clash with students as education protests rage in France
Published
49 minutes ago
Watch: Why students in France are protesting
Published
2 hours ago
More to explore
What's really going on with the lymphatic drainage beauty trend videos?
Chaos, coffins and 'Claudiapatra' steal the show in Celebrity Traitors
Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case. Video Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case
What happened in the failed execution of Christa Pike - and what next?
Weekly quiz: How did two champions fight over marathon dates for next year's London races?
Watch: Endangered moths swarming Australia's east coast. Video Watch: Endangered moths swarming Australia's east coast
Ferguson 'terrified' before 'fantastic' return to Man Utd after brain haemorrhage
Attribution
Sport
Farming award joy for teen inspired by late grandad
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
loading elsewhere stories
Most read
1 I've seen nearly 500 executions - but never one like Christa Pike's
2 Alison Hammond has heart check-up in hospital after leaving TV's This Morning
3 Woman who killed abusive partner has murder conviction overturned
4 Dolly Parton sings Jolene in Welsh in recording released after her death
5 Woman at centre of Cornell rape inquiry was 'failed' by officials, says New York governor
6 Riot police clash with students as education protests rage in France
7 LFB named in Met's evidence file on Grenfell fire
8 Two people dead after workplace incident near rural road
9 Son of ex-Chelsea player died in 40C desert hike
10 Parents say toddler found in middle of main road after wandering off from nursery
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On smart speakers
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Movie Magic on BBC iPlayer
What, like it's hard? Noughties rom-com starring Reese Witherspoon
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Legally Blonde to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Legally Blonde has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Brad Pitt leads a US tank crew on a dangerous mission in WWII
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Fury to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Fury has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Comedy drama charting the fight for women's equal pay in 1968
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Made in Dagenham to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Made in Dagenham has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Oscar-winning psychological thriller starring Daniel Kaluuya
Attribution
iPlayer
Watchlist Add Get Out to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
close panel
Added to Watchlist
Get Out has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sounds
Bitesize
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Make an editorial complaint
Careers
BBC emails for you
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.
