URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/10/2/election-debate-cancelled-in-brazil-bomb-scare-outside-supreme-court
SOURCE: Al Jazeera — published Fri 02 Oct 2026 06:09 GMT / 07:09 BST (RSS pubDate confirmed)
Election debate cancelled in Brazil, bomb scare outside Supreme Court | Elections News | Al Jazeera
Election debate cancelled in Brazil, bomb scare outside Supreme Court
Brazilian president and opposition candidate snub the final debate ahead of the presidential election.
Share Election debate cancelled in Brazil, bomb scare outside Supreme Court on social media
Flags and towels bearing the images of Brazil's President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva and right-wing senator and presidential candidate Flavio Bolsonaro are displayed for sale on a street in Brasilia on September 30, 2026 [AFP]
Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva and his main opponent Flavio Bolsonaro have snubbed a chance at a final debate ahead of the first round of the presidential election on Sunday, while police ruled out a bomb threat outside the country’s Supreme Court.
Lula, instead of taking part in the debate, opted to appear on a popular podcast with millions of YouTube subscribers while his rival Bolsonaro accused the electoral court of “censorship” as a reason for his withdrawal.
A political dynasty? Why the Bolsonaro family dominates Brazil’s right wing
Brazilian government calls for probe into US funding of far-right causes
Everything you need to know about Brazil’s tight presidential race
Bolsonaro, son of the former Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro, said during a live broadcast on Thursday on his social media channels that his decision not to participate in the debate was due to “censorship imposed by the electoral court”.
The right-wing candidate was referring to a decision that barred the debate broadcaster from keeping President Lula’s empty seat on stage.
The debate organised by TV Globo, the country’s most popular broadcaster, was set for Thursday and offered a final opportunity for the two presidential frontrunners to face off before polls open.
TV Globo said in a statement that the debate was cancelled because two rulings, one from the country’s electoral court and the other from the Supreme Court, had created “legal uncertainty” about the event.
Lula, 80, will face off against Bolsonaro in a first-round vote on Sunday, with polls giving him a slight advantage.
The pair are neck and neck in projections for a potential runoff on October 25, however.
On the same day of the cancelled debate, Brazilian police ruled out a bomb threat outside the Supreme Court.
A suspect who “tried to jump the court’s fences” and “threw a backpack on top of a bus stop” had been arrested, the court said in a statement.
Authorities examined the backpack, which ultimately contained “only personal belongings,” military police spokesperson Raphael Broocke told AFP.
The suspect will remain in custody while the investigation continues, he added.
Brazilian police and firefighters inspect the area of a possible bomb in a backpack outside the Supreme Court headquarters in Brasilia on October 1, 2026 [AFP]
The Supreme Court has been criticised by the political right, notably for the 2025 conviction of ex-leader Jair Bolsonaro over a coup plot.
It has also become embroiled in a fraud scandal that has dominated the final weeks of the presidential campaign.
Al Jazeera Centre for Public Liberties & Human Rights
