URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/attorney-general-and-solicitor-general-sworn-in-to-their-roles-as-law-officers-today
GOV.UK Attorney General's Office press release — confirmed published 1 Oct 2026 17:34 BST. Retrieved via curl 2 Oct 2026 ~08:07 BST.

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
Departments
                      Departments, agencies and public bodies
News
                      News stories, speeches, letters and notices
Guidance and regulation
                      Detailed guidance, regulations and rules
Research and statistics
                      Reports, analysis and official statistics
Policy papers and consultations
                      Consultations and strategy
Transparency
                      Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports
×
          

        
          
            Search GOV.UK
          
          

  
  


      
      
        
          
            Search
          
          
            
              
                
  
    Search GOV.UK
  
    
      
    
    
      
        Search
        

  
  


    
  


            
          
        
    
  



        


      
  
        

    



  
        
          Home
The Rt Hon Ellie Reeves KC MP has been sworn in as Attorney General and Andy Slaughter MP has been sworn in as Solicitor General.
The Attorney General Ellie Reeves KC MP (right) with Lady Chief Justice, The Right Honourable the Baroness Carr of Walton-on-the-Hill (left)
The Attorney General, Ellie Reeves KC MP and the Solicitor General, Andy Slaughter MP were sworn in to their roles as Law Officers today at the Royal Courts of Justice.
The ceremony followed their appointments in July earlier this year. The Rt Hon Alex Norris MP was also sworn in as Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice.
The Attorney General Ellie Reeves KC MP said:
It is an honour to be sworn in as Attorney General for England and Wales and Advocate General for Northern Ireland. My career both as a lawyer and now in government has shown me just how important it is that the legal profession is open to everyone, whatever their background, and this is a cause I will champion throughout my time in this role.
Building on the work I was proud to lead as Solicitor General, tackling violence against women and girls remains my top priority.
I look forward to working alongside Andy Slaughter MP on our shared mission to uphold the rule of law and strengthen confidence in our criminal justice system.
