URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cm1dld14weero
SOURCE: BBC News (World) — published Fri 02 Oct 2026 03:09 GMT / 04:09 BST (RSS pubDate confirmed)
Seoul warns 'further action' if Ukraine does not apologise over prisoner-of-war row - BBC News
Seoul warns 'further action' if Ukraine does not apologise over prisoner-of-war row
President Lee Jae Myung also accused Kyiv of "attempting to provoke a war on the Korean Peninsula"
South Korea's President Lee Jae Myung has threatened to take unspecified "further action" if Ukraine does not issue a public apology for revealing that two North Korean prisoners of war had been sent to the South.
Ukraine's leader Volodymyr Zelensky made the disclosure
last week, angering Seoul, who said the move was meant to stay secret.
Ukraine's Foreign Minister Andrii Sybiha on Thursday described the situation as a "diplomatic misunderstanding", adding that Kyiv was "working" to resolve it.
Lee rejected this characterisation on X, saying it concerned "the dignity of the Korean people and the nation".
Lee's office said last week that it was Ukraine that requested for the move to be kept secret, partly to protect the North Koreans' families, and also because Kyiv wanted to avoid criticism that it had given up an opportunity to exchange the soldiers for Ukrainian prisoners of war.
Zelensky's office responded, saying the two countries had no such agreement to keep the move confidential, further escalating the situation.
Lee himself faced heavy criticism at home after Zelensky's disclosure, with the South Korean opposition accusing him of covering up the transfer to appease Pyongyang.
The two soldiers, who were among thousands of North Koreans supporting Russia in the Ukraine war, had earlier told local media they wanted to be sent to South Korea.
Speaking to Ukrainian media on Thursday, Sybiha, the foreign minister, said he "hopes that this situation will be resolved in the very near future".
"We are working on it. For us, South Korea is an important country. And I really hope for momentum, continuation, and concrete results that we are truly achieving with them," he said.
Lee, in response, accused Kyiv of attempting to "bring war on the Korean Peninsula".
"We express serious regret that, instead of acknowledging the facts of the agreement and apologising, they are talking about an imminent military clash between the North and South," he said in an X post.
Seoul has been sympathetic to Ukraine since Russia's full-scale invasion, but has adhered to its longstanding policy of not providing lethal weapons to any country engaged in active war.
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics. 00:01:23, play video
How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics
‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video
‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank. 00:01:44, play video
Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank
'Class of 92 became the spirit of club' 00:01:03, play video
'Class of 92 became the spirit of club'
Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack. 00:01:45, play video
Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack
Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home. 00:00:54, play video
Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home
Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man. 00:01:05, play video
Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man
Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries. 00:00:55, play video
Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries
What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution. 00:01:15, play video
What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution
Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp? 00:01:12, play video
Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp?
New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI. 00:00:54, play video
New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI
What makes you socially anxious? 00:00:59, play video
AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen... 00:00:38, play video
AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen...
Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when? 00:01:01, play video
Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when?
Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school. 00:00:44, play video
Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school
What tactics have the cast got to play The Celebrity Traitors? 00:01:06, play video
What tactics have the cast got to play The Celebrity Traitors?
How Dame Esther Rantzen set up Childline. 00:01:21, play video
How Dame Esther Rantzen set up Childline
How empty chairs are helping people's mental health. 00:01:18, play video
How empty chairs are helping people's mental health
US pressures Europe over diesel reserves as Trump threatens export ban
Crypto thieves attack man in home and threaten to kill pregnant wife's baby in 'horrific' robbery
Chris Mason: Why Andy Burnham's about-turn on Manchester City matters
What's really going on in lymphatic drainage beauty videos?
Chaos, coffins and 'Claudiapatra' steal the show in Celebrity Traitors
The Papers: 'Laughing criminals let loose' and 'Return to the castle'
Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case. Video
Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case
Weekly quiz: How did two champions fight over marathon dates for next year's London races?
Ferguson on brain haemorrhage and games that shaped his life
What we know about Christa Pike’s condition after failed execution. Video
What we know about Christa Pike’s condition after failed execution
Farming award joy for teen inspired by late grandad
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
'Laughing criminals let loose' and 'Return to the castle'
Christa Pike in critical condition after surviving two lethal injections, lawyer says
UK-Iranian dual national arrested over RAF Fairford incident, police say
NY's governor appoints special prosecutor in Cornell frat rape investigation
Spain and China are cosying up - to the anger of many in the EU
New legal drama from the makers of the hit series The Split
Add The Split Up to your Watchlist in iPlayer
The fascinating story of the birth of Jodrell Bank
Indulge in all three series of the gritty French crime drama
Add Paris Police to your Watchlist in iPlayer
Add Complex with Kimberley Wilson to My Sounds
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.
Read about our approach to external linking.
