URL: https://www.cnbc.com/2026/10/02/south-korea-ukraine-prisoner-north-korea-.html
SOURCE: CNBC — published Fri 02 Oct 2026 06:36 GMT / 07:36 BST (RSS pubDate confirmed)
South Korean President Lee warns of 'measures' against Ukraine
South Korean President Lee warns of 'measures' against Ukraine over prisoner row, demands apology
South Korean President Lee Jae Myung threatened “additional measures” against Ukraine unless Kyiv publicly apologizes.
This comes after Ukraine disclosed the transfer of two captured North Korean soldiers to South Korea.
Seoul says Ukraine breached a nondisclosure agreement, while Kyiv has described the dispute as a “diplomatic misunderstanding.”
NEW YORK, UNITED STATES - SEPTEMBER 22: President of South Korea Lee Jae Myung addresses the 81st session of the United Nations General Assembly, which brings together leaders and senior representatives of UN member states in New York, United States, on September 22, 2026.
South Korean President Lee Jae Myung on Friday slammed Ukraine over its disclosure of handing North Korean prisoners of war to Seoul, demanding a public apology and threatening "additional measures" against Kyiv.
, Lee said that Kyiv had unilaterally revealed that some captured North Korean soldiers had been sent to South Korea, despite having demanded confidentiality and later claiming there was no secrecy agreement, making the Korean leader look like a "liar."
"As this is a matter concerning the honor of the Republic of Korea's people and nation, we cannot overlook it," he said in Korean, translated by Google.
Ukrainian Foreign Minister Andrii Sybiha
on Thursday as a "diplomatic misunderstanding," which his country expects to resolve. Seoul remains an important partner for Kyiv, Sybiha added.
At the United Nations General Assembly last week, Ukrainian President
sent two captured North Korean soldiers
That prompted South Korea to accuse Ukraine of
summoning Ukraine's chargé d'affaires
for an explanation. Seoul also said after the speech that Ukraine had asked for the transfer to be kept a secret, as it could negatively impact prisoner exchanges with Russia.
"When we demanded acknowledgement of the agreement and an apology, they instead spoke of an imminent military clash between North and South, praying for the outbreak of war on the Korean Peninsula—we express grave regret toward Ukraine," Lee said on Friday.
The comments follow Ukrainian presidential chief of staff Kyrylo Budanov
last week, where he said that North Korea's participation in the Ukraine-Russia conflict was to prepare for combat on the Korean Peninsula.
"The situation is escalating every day. And it is only a matter of time before a trigger event occurs that will lead to uncontrolled consequences," he added, according to a Google translation of his Telegram post in Ukrainian.
While there has been no explanation from Kyiv on why Zelenskyy made the announcement at the UNGA, South Korea's National Intelligence Service
that he could have done it to stir support in Seoul for sending Kyiv weapons and other aid.
In August, Zelenskyy had requested South Korea to support Ukraine by providing air defense systems, something Seoul has not been
of even as it has offered humanitarian aid to Ukraine.
Choose CNBC as your preferred source on Google and never miss a moment from the most trusted name in business news.
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services.
Versant Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Versant Media Company.
Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes.
Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data
Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
