URL: https://www.theguardian.com/business/2026/oct/01/britain-talks-european-allies-eu-emergency-diesel-stockpiles-reserves
SOURCE: The Guardian — published Thu 01 Oct 2026 16:49 GMT, last modified Fri 02 Oct 2026 05:25 BST (on-page)
Britain in talks with European allies over release of emergency diesel stockpiles amid Trump pressure | International trade | The Guardian
The UK does not refine enough diesel to meet domestic demand. About a third of UK diesel imports last year came from the US.
Britain in talks with European allies over release of emergency diesel stockpiles amid Trump pressure
Ministers discuss drawing down EU countries’ reserves after Donald Trump threatens to cut off US supplies
Last modified on Fri 2 Oct 2026 05.25 BST
Britain is in talks with European allies over releasing emergency diesel stockpiles after Donald Trump threatened to cut off US supplies of the fuel.
Ministers held calls with counterparts from the European Commission (EC), Germany, France, Italy and Ireland on Thursday to discuss whether to draw down reserves after the
told Germany and France to release their stockpiles to help ease soaring global energy prices or face a US export ban.
The warning marks an escalation of pressure on Europe as Trump
to help lower domestic fuel prices before the US midterm elections in November.
Trump said Washington could ask its European allies to release strategic diesel reserves. “We may do that. They have some diesel,” Trump told reporters on a midterm elections campaign trip to Texas, shortly after the Treasury secretary, Scott Bessent, urged Europe to “immediately” release its reserves.
Bessent flagged the potential diesel cuts in a social media post, writing: “Our European partners should accelerate delivery on their existing commitments and make additional supplies immediately available to address ongoing disruptions.”
Martin McCluskey, the UK minister for local energy, was reportedly on the call with EU countries on Thursday.
The Trump administration has been frustrated with France and Germany for what it considers their not following through on commitments to release oil and petrol stocks.
Fuel stations across Europe are unlikely to run dry, because Europe produces about 70% of the diesel it consumes from domestic refineries. It also stores fuels in reserve. But experts fear that competing for cargoes on the global market would lead to higher market prices.
It was unclear whether the UK would be included in such a ban, but the loss of US supply would drive prices up sharply at the pumps because the UK does not refine enough diesel to meet domestic demand. About a third of UK diesel imports last year came from the US.
in the UK hit a new all-time high on Wednesday of 199.72p, according to the motoring body the RAC.
John Healey, the chancellor, admitted earlier this week that UK diesel prices were “extreme” and said the government was in discussion with the US over trying to stop a ban.
EC commission spokesperson Anna Kaisa Itkonen confirmed that EU member states will hold urgent talks with the commission on Friday to discuss a coordinated response.
“The commission … is closely coordinating with EU member states to take stock of the situation and examine appropriate measures to tackle these high prices,” Itkonen added. Discussions will also involve the International Energy Agency.
The US energy secretary Chris Wright said ​he was “highly confident” Europe could help ease soaring global fuel ⁠prices by drawing down its emergency diesel inventories.
“This is a time for a coordinated release of diesel stores as we go ⁠into to harvest season and we ​go ​into winter heating oil season,” he told Fox ⁠News. “Now’s the time to ​bring more ‌diesel to the ​market, ​and that diesel is available.”
Get set for the working day – we'll point you to all the business news and analysis you need every morning
Miatta Fahnbulleh, the UK energy secretary, has been in contact with Wright to raise concerns.
Earlier, a US official told reporters it was “in Europe’s best interest” to ⁠work with the US as it pursues options to boost the supply of refined products and lower costs for consumers.
The US war in Iran has disrupted energy supplies via the strait of Hormuz and sent the price of oil soaring. Before the war, in February, Brent crude – the international benchmark for oil prices – traded at about $72 a barrel. It was above $101 on Thursday.
represent a problem for European countries,
which need to balance the need to bring down domestic fuel prices with keeping high stocks for a potential worsening energy crisis over the winter if the Iran war continues.
“The UK continues to need fuels – from transport to chemicals, agriculture and defence,” said Elizabeth de Jong, the chief executive of the trade group Fuels Industry UK. The latest US threat showed the UK “cannot solely rely on overseas production for domestic energy security”, she added.
Trump has said he was “very seriously” considering a US diesel export ban to try to curb soaring prices, and has urged Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, to
pause strikes on Russian oil refineries
over concerns that they could further push up prices. Russia had already extended its ban on diesel exports until the end of October after Ukrainian attacks on refining companies.
A government spokesperson said: “We have a diverse and resilient supply. We continue to engage with our international partners and the UK fuel industry.”
Price of diesel on UK forecourts reaches all-time high
EU says Trump’s plan to ban US diesel exports would ‘negatively impact both sides’
‘Astronomical’ fuel price surge hits farmers in UK and US
UK petrol prices hit highest level in almost four years as bank holiday getaway looms
UK retailers too slow to pass on fuel price falls, watchdog says
UK petrol price hits Iran war high, adding to pressure on households
Retail sales rise in Great Britain after Iran war prompted ‘panic at the pumps’
Fuel-price protests cause chaos in Ireland and spread to Norway
Northern Ireland leads surge in fuel prices since start of Iran war
Drivers told to look for cheapest fuel ahead of ‘busiest Easter on UK roads since 2022’
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
