URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c3n070vxkjl9o
BBC News (Katy Austin, Tabby Wilson) — published Fri 2 Oct 2026 04:55 BST, updated 08:00 BST. Retrieved via curl 2 Oct 2026 ~08:06 BST.

Image source, Getty ImagesByKaty Austin, Transport correspondent and Tabby WilsonPublished2 October 2026, 04:55 BST
The government says it will ensure parents cannot be charged for sitting next to their children on planes if new powers get approval in Parliament.
If the Civil Aviation Bill gets approved by MPs, the Department for Transport (DfT) says it will consult on scrapping any charges for being seated next to children under the age of 14 or correcting minor errors on flight bookings.
While acknowledging most UK airlines already offer protections against hidden costs, the government said its proposed reforms would provide greater consistency across all airlines operating in the country.
Trade body Airlines UK said minor name corrections are already allowed free of charge, while airlines including easyJet and Ryanair have denied that extra fees exist.
Airlines UK said it was surprised to see the announcement and added UK airlines adhere to current Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) guidance on the seating of children under 12.
The DfT says it can currently cost £104 for a parent and child to sit together on a return journey while small mistakes or admin tweaks can cost passengers up to £40.
Prime Minister Andy Burnham has said the proposed rule changes are part of a crackdown on the "little charges that add up" when families plan their holiday trips.
"Parents should not have to feel the pinch just to sit next to their child on a flight, or for amending a simple booking error," said Transport Secretary Heidi Alexander.
Ryanair said "no such extra fees exist" and accused Alexander of "pretending to do something while in reality doing nothing".
The airline's CEO Michael O'Leary said this "is not an 'everyday fix' it's just 'everyday spin' from a Govt that keeps raising taxes on air travel for UK families and visitors".
An easyJet spokesperson similarly said they and other UK airlines "already offer free changes for spelling mistakes and we have never forced parents and children to pay to sit together".
The airline noted the only change under the government's proposal is moving the age of children included in the current rules from 12 to 14.
Rory Boland, editor of consumer magazine Which? Travel, said it was "clearly unfair to force parents and children as young as three to pay an extra fee just to sit together".
"Airlines that have separated families are putting profit ahead of passenger peace of mind," he said.
Ryanair investigated over charging parents to sit with children
'I still saved £4,000' - mum calls for school holiday fine change'
Ticket prices set to rise by 15p as Heathrow able to recover runway project money
In June, Ryanair changed its family seating policy to allow parents to sit next to their young children without paying a seat reservation fee.
It followed an investigation by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) into whether the airline's policy, which the watchdog said typically led to a fee of £8 each way, was unfair under consumer law.
Ryanair had originally said adults travelling with children pay one reserved seat fee, but can select reserved seats beside them for up to four children on the same booking free of charge.
The raft of changes - which are still going through Parliament - include a new system for sharing information on persistently disruptive passengers, which would be created with help from airlines and trade unions.
The government says that in 2025 more than 1,000 serious disruptive passenger incidents were logged by airlines, including a mid-air brawl that resulted in a flight being diverted.
Alexander said everyone deserved to travel knowing their flight would not be disrupted by "bad behavior from a small minority".
Airlines UK said it welcomed a commitment to crack down on disruptive passengers.
The changes are set to be delivered following Royal Assent of the Civil Aviation Bill, external. It is understood that ministers will try to implement the changes before the start of next year's summer holidays.
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
PreviousNext1:23How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics. 00:01:23, play videoHow Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics
1:01‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
1:44Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank. 00:01:44, play videoTwo pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank
