URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/10/2/trump-says-us-may-ask-europe-to-release-diesel-reserves
SOURCE: Al Jazeera — published Fri 02 Oct 2026 01:23 GMT / 02:23 BST (RSS pubDate confirmed)
Trump says US may ask Europe to release diesel reserves | Donald Trump News | Al Jazeera
Trump, Netanyahu and the Iran question
How Iran war fallout may shape US elections
Trump says US may ask Europe to release diesel reserves
EU trade chief said a US ban on diesel would be “unexpected” but would have detrimental effects on Europe’s economy.
Share Trump says US may ask Europe to release diesel reserves on social media
Gas prices above $7 per gallon for regular petrol and $8 per gallon for diesel are displayed at a Mobil gas station in Los Angeles, on September 23, 2026 [AFP]
President Donald Trump has said that the US could ask European countries to release diesel reserves, as Washington tries to rein in rising
The US president told reporters on Thursday that his administration “may” ask European countries to release diesel stocks, shortly after Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent urged Europe to “immediately” tap its reserves.
Is Iran losing its leverage over the Strait of Hormuz?
Trump approval rating hits career low of 32% amid Iran war, high costs
What would a US diesel export ban mean for global fuel prices?
“Our European partners should accelerate delivery on their existing commitments and make additional supplies immediately available to address ongoing disruptions,” Bessent said in a social media post.
Earlier, US Trade Representative Jamieson Greer said that he believes France, Germany and Italy “would love to have a ⁠⁠⁠⁠cooperative path forward with the ⁠⁠⁠⁠United States on ⁠⁠⁠⁠how we get more diesel to market”.
European capitals have spent Thursday coordinating diesel measures, while US Energy Secretary Chris Wright said he was “highly confident” Europe could help ease soaring global prices by releasing emergency diesel inventories. ⁠⁠
US diesel prices have surged, hitting a record of $6.53 ⁠⁠⁠⁠per gallon a week ago, as data published by the European Commission showed 12 EU member states had recorded new all-time highs, including Italy, Belgium, Romania and Poland.
The spike in US diesel prices prompted the Trump administration and Republican lawmakers to consider restricting US diesel exports ahead of upcoming midterm elections.
France and Germany hold more than a third of the EU’s strategic diesel reserves, according to the Reuters news agency. EU trade chief Maros Sefcovic said a US ban on diesel would be “unexpected” but would have detrimental effects on Europe’s economy.
Al Jazeera Centre for Public Liberties & Human Rights
