URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/take-off-for-passengers-as-government-scraps-extra-charges-when-flying
GOV.UK Department for Transport press release — confirmed published 1 Oct 2026 22:30 BST, announcing measures for 2 October 2026. Retrieved via curl 2 Oct 2026 ~08:07 BST.

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.
You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.
Departments
                      Departments, agencies and public bodies
News
                      News stories, speeches, letters and notices
Guidance and regulation
                      Detailed guidance, regulations and rules
Research and statistics
                      Reports, analysis and official statistics
Policy papers and consultations
                      Consultations and strategy
Transparency
                      Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports
×
          

        
          
            Search GOV.UK
          
          

  
  


      
      
        
          
            Search
          
          
            
              
                
  
    Search GOV.UK
  
    
      
    
    
      
        Search
        

  
  


    
  


            
          
        
    
  



        


      
  
        

    



  
        
          Home
From 2 October 2026, airlines will be required to seat children under the age of 14 with a parent or accompanying adult free of charge.
extra charges for parents sitting with their children scrapped across airlines to help people with the cost of living
greater flexibility to amend simple name mistakes when booking flights so passengers avoid unnecessary charges
airlines and government working together to crack down on disorderly and seriously disruptive passengers
latest measure in Prime Minister’s series of ‘everyday fixes’ to give families room to breathe
Holidaymakers are set to save money as government steps in to ease pressure on the cost of living in time for next year’s summer holidays, scrapping child seating fees and unnecessary admin costs.
Under new plans announced tomorrow (2 October 2026), airlines will be required to seat children under the age of 14 with a parent or accompanying adult free of charge. Parents should not feel pressured to pay extra simply to sit beside their child – currently, a parent and child could be charged up to £104 on a return journey.
Passengers will also be given greater flexibility to correct simple name errors on bookings for free, ending unfair and irritating charges – sometimes as much as £40 – for minor mistakes or admin tweaks.
Alongside this, government has announced it is working with airlines and trade unions to create a new system for sharing information on persistently disruptive passengers.
In 2025, more than 1,000 serious disruptive passenger incidents were logged by airlines, including a mid-air brawl that resulted in a flight being diverted, causing significant disruption to passengers and crew as well as costs for the airline.
The new system will make disruptors easier to spot, keeping staff and passengers safer from the get-go and enabling airlines to take decisions on whether to extend a ban on their airline.
While most UK airlines already offer protections against hidden costs, these new reforms will give passengers greater consistency on all airlines operating in the UK.
Charging parents just to sit with their children is a rip-off, plain and simple. And being hit with a hefty fee for a simple spelling mistake on a booking form isn’t right either.
People are fed up with these little charges that add up, so I’m putting a stop to them.
This is what our everyday fixes are all about. Giving people room to breathe by tackling the small irritations that catch people out, waste their time and cost them money.
Transport Secretary Heidi Alexander said:
Parents should not have to feel the pinch just to sit next to their child on a flight, or for amending a simple booking error. That’s why we’re scrapping these unnecessary charges for all airlines – another everyday fix to help put money back in people’s pockets and give households more breathing room.
And everyone deserves to travel knowing their flight isn’t going to be disrupted by bad behaviour from a small minority.
