URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/10/2/row-between-ukraine-south-korea-mounts-over-north-korean-pows
SOURCE: Al Jazeera — published Fri 02 Oct 2026 02:54 GMT / 03:54 BST (RSS pubDate confirmed)
Row between Ukraine, South Korea mounts over North Korean POWs | News | Al Jazeera
Row between Ukraine, South Korea mounts over North Korean POWs
South Korea’s ⁠President accused Ukraine of ⁠undermining him and called on Kyiv to apologise.
Share Row between Ukraine, South Korea mounts over North Korean POWs on social media
South Korean President Lee Jae Myung (C) arrives for the 78th Armed Forces Day at a military base in Gyeryong on October 1, 2026. [AFP]
South Korea’s ⁠President ⁠Lee Jae Myung has expressed anger at Ukraine over comments by Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in a speech at the UN which appeared to reveal a secret deal by which Kyiv would transfer
In a social media post on Friday, Lee accused Ukraine of undermining him and ⁠warned that Zelenskyy’s ⁠remarks about an imminent military clash between North and South Korea ‌amounted to invoking the risk of war on ‌the ‌Korean Peninsula.
Ukraine’s Zelenskyy calls for sustained pressure to end ‘Putin’s crazy war’
Why South Korea is demanding an apology from Ukraine over North Korean PoWs
S Korea demands apology over DMZ blasts as N Korea denies planting mines
The diplomatic row pits two US-aligned states with powerful militaries against each other, potentially complicating US efforts to shore up a united global front to contain Russia, China and North Korea.
The South Korean president also expressed ⁠regret over Ukraine’s response and called on Kyiv to acknowledge the agreement and apologise.
“This is a matter concerning the honor of the Republic of Korea’s people and nation, we cannot overlook it,” Lee said.
South Korean Lawmaker Yu Yong-weon explains pictures, showing two North Korean POWs who were recently transferred from Ukraine to South Korea. Face of POWs are blurred due to security reason by the source. [File: Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters]
Lee also referred to an interview with Ukraine’s Foreign Minister Andrii Sybiha published by RBC-Ukraine and other Ukrainian outlets on Thursday which sought to reduce bilateral tensions.
Sybiha had said he would “not like to call it an incident”, describing it instead as a “diplomatic misunderstanding”.
“South Korea is an important country for us. And I very much hope for momentum, continued cooperation, and concrete results that we are indeed achieving with them,” he said.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said during the UN General Assembly that Kyiv had transferred two captured North Korean soldiers to South Korea after they were caught fighting for Russia in the Kursk region.
South Korea demanded an official apology and explanation from Ukraine, accusing Kyiv of disclosing the transfer of the two North Korean POWs to Seoul.
South Korea’s senior presidential secretary Seong Ghi-hong said in a statement that Ukraine had repeatedly discussed the prisoners’ transfer with Seoul through various channels and had requested secrecy. However, Kyiv has said no secrecy agreement existed.
Al Jazeera Centre for Public Liberties & Human Rights
