URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c5zjzjgdeneeo
SOURCE: BBC News (World) — published Fri 02 Oct 2026 06:59 GMT / 07:59 BST (RSS pubDate confirmed)
US pressures Europe over diesel reserves as Trump threatens export ban - BBC News
US pressures Europe over diesel reserves as Trump threatens export ban
Donald Trump has said he may ask European countries to release some of their diesel reserves as he considers banning US exports of the fuel.
The US President's comment comes after Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent urged Europe to get ready to release diesel supplies immediately, arguing that US farmers, truckers, and businesses "should not be left carrying the burden" as prices soar.
threatened to restrict diesel exports
after the war in Iran caused prices to soar. The cost of fuel is a priority issue for US voters ahead of the midterm elections in November.
On Thursday, the UK held talks with European partners about the
of diesel reserves in response to any ban.
Banning exports would flood the US market with diesel, and could bring prices down significantly for American drivers.
But experts warn such a ban would put further pressure on diesel prices in other countries, unless they can access further supplies.
The US is a vital supplier of diesel to the world, exporting between 1.2 and 1.5 million barrels per day.
Over half of the UK's diesel is imported, with 31% of the imports coming from the US.
On Thursday, Trump was asked whether he would call on European countries to release some of their own diesel reserves.
"We may do that. They have some diesel," he said.
An earlier post from Bessent on social media said European countries should "make additional supplies immediately available".
The president is set to travel across the US campaigning for Republicans in the coming weeks in hopes of keeping control of the House and Senate in the November's elections.
and are hovering just under 200p per litre, according to motoring organisation the RAC.
UK Energy Minister Martin McCluskey was on a call with European counterparts on Thursday to discuss the potential ban.
A source familiar with the discussions told the BBC it was prudent to prepare a co-ordinated response with other countries, including those across EU, but added that there were still European reserves left from a coordinated release of strategic fuel stocks earlier in the year.
"We have a diverse and resilient supply. We continue to engage with our international partners and the UK fuel industry," a government spokesperson said.
The government has stressed that there is no cause for concern about potential diesel shortages, though prices are expected to rise further.
What a US diesel export ban could mean for you
A European Commission spokesperson said today that there were "lots of calls, lots of meetings" taking place on the diesel situation, including with "high level contacts" in the US administration.
Potentially adding to the pressure on the global diesel market, Chinese refiners have reportedly halted October exports of some fuel products as Beijing prioritises domestic supplies.
The BBC has contacted the Chinese embassy in Washington for comment.
Prices of petrol and diesel globally have skyrocketed since the outbreak of the US-Israel war in Iran in February. The closure of the vital Strait of Hormuz, which typically transports around a fifth of the world's oil and gas, has pushed up the price of products made from oil.
An export ban from Russia, also a major supplier of diesel, has added to the pressure on prices.
Trump has argued that keeping any surplus barrels of diesel in the US would lower pump prices domestically, offering immediate relief to drivers, truckers, and businesses ahead of the midterm elections.
But David Fyfe, chief economist at Argus Media, said cutting off American supply would be likely to cause international prices to skyrocket.
Diesel prices have hit an all-time high in the UK, with the latest RAC figures showing average pump prices at 199.79p per litre, up from 142.38p
Diesel is harder to refine than gasoline and, because it is used by the haulage industry and in agriculture, it is very difficult to reduce demand.
The UK is heavily reliant on imports. Although the four refineries in the UK make more than enough petrol to meet demand, they do not make enough diesel for the country's needs.
There were 15.1 million diesel vehicles on UK roads at the end of June, according to the Department for Transport. That is a drop from 15.7 million a year before.
There were 9.8 million diesel cars, down year on year from 10.4 million.
UK diesel price hits all-time high, the RAC says
Why UK diesel prices have hit an all-time high
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics. 00:01:23, play video
How Gen Z TikToks are shaping Kenyan politics
‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC? 00:01:01, play video
‘I’d never take two weeks’: What's leave like in NYC?
Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank. 00:01:44, play video
Two pals, a missing top and the ultimate 25-year prank
'Class of 92 became the spirit of club' 00:01:03, play video
'Class of 92 became the spirit of club'
Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack. 00:01:45, play video
Pilot hailed as a hero after Flydubai flight attack
Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home. 00:00:54, play video
Dog rescued from squalid conditions finds new home
Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man. 00:01:05, play video
Prison conditions are 'awful', says released man
Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries. 00:00:55, play video
Rollercoaster closed after over 100 allege brain injuries
What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution. 00:01:15, play video
What we know about Christa Pike's failed execution
Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp? 00:01:12, play video
Why has Ronaldo walked out of Portugal camp?
New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI. 00:00:54, play video
New 'R' plates for recently qualified drivers in NI
What makes you socially anxious? 00:00:59, play video
AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen... 00:00:38, play video
AJ reassures fans that Fury fight will happen...
Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when? 00:01:01, play video
Which prisoners are being released in new scheme and when?
Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school. 00:00:44, play video
Harry and Meghan criticise photographer near kids' school
What tactics have the cast got to play The Celebrity Traitors? 00:01:06, play video
What tactics have the cast got to play The Celebrity Traitors?
How Dame Esther Rantzen set up Childline. 00:01:21, play video
How Dame Esther Rantzen set up Childline
How empty chairs are helping people's mental health. 00:01:18, play video
How empty chairs are helping people's mental health
Crypto thieves attack man in home and threaten to kill pregnant wife's baby in 'horrific' robbery
Chris Mason: Why Andy Burnham's about-turn on Manchester City matters
What's really going on in lymphatic drainage beauty videos?
Chaos, coffins and 'Claudiapatra' steal the show in Celebrity Traitors
The Papers: 'Laughing criminals let loose' and 'Return to the castle'
Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case. Video
Cornell students voice frustration at public hearing over rape case
Weekly quiz: How did two champions fight over marathon dates for next year's London races?
Ferguson on brain haemorrhage and games that shaped his life
What we know about Christa Pike’s condition after failed execution. Video
What we know about Christa Pike’s condition after failed execution
Farming award joy for teen inspired by late grandad
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
'Laughing criminals let loose' and 'Return to the castle'
Christa Pike in critical condition after surviving two lethal injections, lawyer says
Seoul warns 'further action' if Ukraine does not apologise over prisoner-of-war row
UK-Iranian dual national arrested over RAF Fairford incident, police say
NY's governor appoints special prosecutor in Cornell frat rape investigation
Spain and China are cosying up - to the anger of many in the EU
New legal drama from the makers of the hit series The Split
Add The Split Up to your Watchlist in iPlayer
The fascinating story of the birth of Jodrell Bank
Indulge in all three series of the gritty French crime drama
Add Paris Police to your Watchlist in iPlayer
Add Complex with Kimberley Wilson to My Sounds
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.
Read about our approach to external linking.
