URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cxvgdl5npl86o
BBC: Tories pledge £10bn Britannia Shield air defence

Tories pledge £10bn British 'Iron Dome' air defence system

The UK's existing Sky Sabre air defence system, seen in 2022 at the Royal Artillery's change of colours parade at Baker Barracks, Thorney Island

Troops march eyes right next to an Army vehicle.

The Conservatives have pledged to invest £10bn in a British \"Iron Dome\", inspired by Israel's elaborate air defence system, to defend the UK if they win the next general election.

The party said the so-called \"Britannia Shield\" would offer the UK an integrated network of radar, command and control systems, as well as interceptor missiles.

In a speech at the Tory conference on Tuesday, shadow defence secretary James Cartlidge will describe it as \"the most significant upgrade to UK air defence for generations\".

Defence Secretary Wes Streeting said the Tories had an \"abysmal record\" of defending Britain during their 14 years in power, adding: \"They owe Britain an apology, not another lecture.\"

The party said the air defence system would be capable of defending the UK's critical national infrastructure, military bases and sovereign territories from sophisticated threats.

It added the proposal would strengthen the UK's air defence systems at a time when Nato allies have warned they are facing repeated Russian drone incursions.

The party also cited a report from the defence committee of MPs last November which said the UK was lagging behind its European counterparts in having a plan to defend itself and overseas territories from a military attack.

The UK's existing Sky Sabre system has previously been deployed in Poland as part of its support for Ukraine

The Conservative Party said its \"Britannia Shield\" would have three components - new advanced radar systems, upgraded command and control systems to integrate information from across Britain's defences and rapidly decide a response, and new interceptor missiles as well as counter-drone capabilities.

The three-tiered design of the proposal is similar to the British Army's current Sky Sabre air defence system.

This system - which can intercept munitions and aircraft as well as integrate with wider air defences - was deployed by the UK to the Middle East earlier this year for defensive action against Iranian attacks.

In his speech at the conference in Birmingham, Cartlidge will say: \"With a £10bn budget, this would be one of Britain's most significant military programmes since the cold war.

\"But one that is totally necessary because of the threats we face.\"

Streeting said in response: \"They [the Conservatives] cut the Army to its smallest size since Napoleon and left a £17 billion hole in the equipment plan.

\"Their own defence secretary, Ben Wallace, admitted our Armed Forces had been 'hollowed out and underfunded'.\"

The Conservatives said their plan would be funded within their existing commitment to spend 3% of GDP on defence by 2030, paid for by welfare reform and reprioritisation of existing expenditure.

Prime Minister Andy Burnham has been under pressure to set out how he will reach Nato's 3.5% of GDP spending target by 2035, up from an estimated 2.6% this year.

The current Labour government's Defence Investment Plan includes more than £350m to double the number of Sky Sabre systems operated by the British Army, with ground-based air defence sitting alongside air and maritime capabilities.

Sign up for our Politics Essential newsletter to keep up with the inner workings of Westminster and beyond.

Listen to Here For The History on BBC Sounds.

Listen to the full episode of What's Up Docs? on BBC Sounds.

More about Jeremy Clarkson's surprise appearance at the Conservative Party conference.

The Conservative Party is holding its annual conference in Birmingham.

BBC News speaks to young Tory members about who they would vote for if their party didn't exist.

Read our article on the job interview question you don't have to answer.

More on the situation in Spain.

More on Afghanistan's well issue.

Listen to The Martin Lewis Podcast on BBC Sounds.

Listen to Woman's Hour on BBC Sounds.

Get your latest BBC Weather forecast.