URL: https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-trump-us-oil-prices-yemen-red-sea-houthis-bab-el-mandeb/
CBS 07:13 Tue live: Battle with Houthis tempers news on oil flow

Updated on:  October 6, 2026 / 2:13 AM EDT
            / CBS News

Gov. Gavin Newsom rebuked President Trump after he suggested letting Iran "take out" Los Angeles and San Diego during a campaign rally in Nebraska.

"It's a small price to pay for keeping the world safe, keeping our country safe," Mr. Trump said. "They can take out a city. Let them take out Los Angeles. Let them take out San Diego."

Attendees cheered after his suggestion.

"After sending the National Guard and Marines to occupy California, Donald Trump is now saying our foreign enemies should 'take out' Los Angeles and San Diego," Newsom wrote on X. "He is deranged and dangerous."

San Diego Mayor Todd Gloria wrote on X that, "San Diego is not collateral damage. We are not expendable. And we are never a 'small price to pay.' Keep our city out of your reckless war talk."

President Trump on Monday signed an executive order to ease limits on the tax-free use of red dye diesel, a decision he said would save "millions" for farmers and drive down the cost of all goods as war with Iran continues to drive up fuel prices.

"The typical trucker will save more than $100 every time they fill up," Mr. Trump said, signing the executive order onstage before a crowd in Grand Island, Nebraska, located in the solidly conservative south-central part of the state.

"Pete and Jim, this should absolutely ensure your election, I guarantee you that," Mr. Trump said, addressing GOP Gov. Pete Ricketts, who is running against an independent candidate backed by national Democrats, and Gov. Jim Pillen, who is seeking a second term.

Diesel fuel prices have spiked in the aftermath of the Iran war, rattling voters and putting pressure on Republicans. It hit a record high of $6.53 a gallon last month, and has only eased slightly since then, according to AAA data.

The dyed diesel fuel is exempt from federal and state excise taxes. Temporarily removing the limits would reduce cost pressures on the businesses that rely on diesel.

Mr. Trump last month also floated the idea of banning diesel exports to help temporarily lower prices.

The Iran-backed Houthis in Yemen said they had struck the international airport in Saudi Arabia's capital of Riyadh, a Saudi Aramco refinery and other sites across the kingdom's south in response to the Saudi-led coalition's attacks on Houthi military targets earlier Monday.

The attacks, which included drones, ballistic and cruise missiles, targeted King Khalid International Airport in Riyadh, Houthi military spokesman Yahya Saree said in a statement, adding that the Aramco refinery in Rabigh was also hit along with military sites and smaller airports.

The statement also warned "all global airlines using Saudi airspace against continuing their flights," with the exception of airspace over Mecca and Medina.

The U.S. military destroyed 13 commercial ships in the Strait of Hormuz over the past 12 weeks, U.S. Central Command said in a statement Monday.

CENTCOM said the commercial vessels were either violating the U.S. Navy's blockade of the waterway, which resumed nearly three months ago under President Trump's direction, or were part of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps' multibillion-dollar shadow network.

Since July 14, U.S. forces have disabled three ships that refused to comply and redirected 130 commercial vessels attempting to pass through the strait, according to CENTCOM.

A Saudi Arabia-led coalition in Yemen said Monday it had struck "military targets" belonging to the Houthis in Hodeida on the Red Sea coast.

Coalition spokesman Turki Al-Malki said on X that its naval forces had "destroyed weapons depots, facilities storing booby-trapped boats and naval mines" and had "thwarted a planned attack" targeting waterways in the southern Red Sea.

The Yemeni military said it carried out more than 1,000 strikes and began an offensive against the Houthi-held capital, Sanaa, while the Saudi-led coalition supporting the internationally recognized government said 100 warplanes flew sorties at dawn.

The government had announced on Sunday the lofty goal of retaking all Houthi territory — home to most of Yemen's population, and much of it held for more than a decade.

Last month, the Iran-backed group seized swathes of coastline along the Red Sea and Bab el-Mandeb Strait, a chokepoint for oil and cargo shipping, in Yemen's deadliest fighting in years.

Turkey and Pakistan will undertake a "rapid deployment" of troops to Saudi Arabia as part of a new mutual defense alliance, the three countries said Monday, as the Gulf kingdom faces escalating attacks from Yemen's Houthis.

Following a meeting in Riyadh, the trio agreed "to move immediately to the practical implementation of the collective defense commitments and to take the necessary measures to provide the agreed military forces and capabilities and ensure their rapid deployment in the Kingdom," according to a joint statement.

Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian said negotiations with the U.S. were "meaningless" and only resulted in renewed attacks, state media reported, with progress on ending the Middle East war stalled for months.

"So far, they have attacked us three times after talks, and this shows that they are not seeking dialogue; rather, their goal is to overthrow the Islamic Republic of Iran," Pezeshkian was quoted as saying by the state news agency IRNA on Monday.

"With an enemy that every day resorts to assassination, sanctions, pressure and threats, and that breaks its commitments, negotiations are meaningless."

Negotiations have effectively been at an impasse since Iranian attacks on vessels in the Strait of Hormuz prompted the U.S. to resume military operations, and recent indirect talks between the U.S. and Iran on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly failed to produce a breakthrough.

After the U.S. scaled back military operations in September, favoring economic pressure instead, Iran's top diplomat said Sunday that the war would not be resolved through military action or new sanctions.

Vowing that Iran would respond with a stronger defense if attacks resumed, Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi said that "only negotiations based on justice and fairness could end the conflict."

Iraqi Airways will resume direct flights to Iran starting Thursday, the airline announced Monday, according to Iraq's Ministry of Transport.

The airline said its "new operating plan will include regular daily flights" between Najaf International Airport, in central Iraq, and major Iranian airports in Mashhad, Tehran and Isfahan.

The move comes as part of efforts by Iraq's Ministry of Transport to "reactivate air transport" and strengthen air connectivity between Iraq and regional destinations.

According to the ministry's statement, the move to restore flights to Iran aims to "enhance the smooth flow of passengers" and provide "regular air transport options between Iraq and Iranian cities."

President Trump on Monday blamed Ukrainian attacks on Russian oil refineries for high gas prices, insisting that the Iran war was no longer responsible.

"What's driving up Gasoline is no longer the Strait of Hormuz, because Record Numbers of Barrels are coming out now on an almost daily basis, but the word, 'Refineries,' where Russia's are being blown up by Ukraine," Mr. Trump wrote in a Truth Social post.

Mr. Trump also blamed what he said was the closing of oil refineries in California, led by Democratic Gov. Gavin Newsom, with whom the president has a longstanding political rivalry. His comments came as the Republican Party potentially faces losing control of Congress after the November midterm elections.

Iranian Interior Minister Eskandar Momeni traveled to Doha on Monday, where he'd been invited by his Qatari counterpart to meet with senior Qatari officials.

Momeni was scheduled to meet and hold talks with Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, Qatar's interior minister, according to Iran's Interior Ministry's Information Center. The center said Momeni would also meet with several other Qatari officials during the visit, joined by a delegation of Iranian Interior Ministry officials and governors who accompanied him.

United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres said Monday that he is concerned about the "sharp escalation" of conflict in Yemen, amid fighting between Houthi rebels and Saudi-backed government forces.

"The Secretary-General is deeply concerned by the sharp escalation in fighting, which has intensified markedly in recent days," Guterres' spokesperson, Stéphane Dujarric, said.

"He condemns the continued Houthi cross-border attacks against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia."

U.S. soldiers wounded in the Iran war's deadliest strike yet on American troops are raising concerns publicly, many for the first time, about whether commanders underestimated the threat. Some of those wounded also said the military medical system failed them.

The Pentagon has so far released few details about the Iranian drone strike on Port Shuaiba in Kuwait that killed six soldiers on March 1, the day after the U.S. and Israel started the war against Iran.