URL: https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2026/oct/06/kemi-badenoch-conservatives-labour-reform-greens-uk-politics-latest-news
Guardian: UK politics live 6 Oct - Badenoch Iron Dome

Conservatives plan ‘new integrated air and missile defence system to protect Britain from attack – in essence, a British “Iron Dome”’

Key events6m agoBadenoch says Penny Mordaunt was 'fantastic MP' - but rules out special treatment for ex-MPs in candidate selection12m agoBadenoch won't say whether speech tomorrow will include plan to cut inheritance tax14m agoBadenoch does not accept claims £10bn not enough to fund missile defence19m agoBadenoch pays tribute to Jeffrey Archer, saying he sent her supportive text hours before he died23m agoLib Dems say Tories would only be able to get 'Patchwork Dome' for £10bn27m agoWhat Tories are saying about how their proposed 'Britannia Shield' would work34m agoPolitics Badenoch calls for UK ‘Iron Dome’ missile defence system Israel's Iron Dome air defence system shoots down rockets fired from Lebanon. Photograph: Jalaa Marey/AFP/Getty ImagesView image in fullscreenIsrael's Iron Dome air defence system shoots down rockets fired from Lebanon. Photograph: Jalaa Marey/AFP/Getty ImagesAndrew SparrowTue 6 Oct 2026 07.51 BSTFirst published on Tue 6 Oct 2026 07.19 BSTShareFrom 14m ago07.39 BSTBadenoch does not accept claims £10bn not enough to fund missile defenceJon Kay is interviewing Badenoch.

He puts it to her that the UK would need a very different missile defence system from Israel. Israel is under threat from short-range missiles, he says.

Badenoch says it is not just missiles that threaten the UK; drones are a threat too.

Q: Would £10bn be enough to pay for it?

Badenoch says it can be done. The £10bn would be spent over 10 years, she says. She says the UK needs to be protected.

Key events6m agoBadenoch says Penny Mordaunt was 'fantastic MP' - but rules out special treatment for ex-MPs in candidate selection12m agoBadenoch won't say whether speech tomorrow will include plan to cut inheritance tax14m agoBadenoch does not accept claims £10bn not enough to fund missile defence19m agoBadenoch pays tribute to Jeffrey Archer, saying he sent her supportive text hours before he died23m agoLib Dems say Tories would only be able to get 'Patchwork Dome' for £10bn27m agoWhat Tories are saying about how their proposed 'Britannia Shield' would work34m agoPolitics Badenoch calls for UK ‘Iron Dome’ missile defence system3m ago07.51 BSTBadenoch is on Times Radio now. She is being interviewed by Kate McCann.

Asked when she would raise defence spending to 3.5% of GDP, Badenoch says she has a plan to get to 3%. But she is not in government.

Q: But you say there might be an election soon?

Badenoch says the 3.5% is a Nato target.

She says she is not in government, and she implies it is unreasonable for McCann to expect her to set out a path to 3.5% when she is not in government.

6m ago07.48 BSTBadenoch says Penny Mordaunt was 'fantastic MP' - but rules out special treatment for ex-MPs in candidate selectionQ: Would you like to see Penny Mordaunt selected as a Tory candidate?

(At the weekend Mordaunt, the former cabinet minister who lost her seat at the election, revealed she has been approved for the candidates list, which means she can apply to be a candidate in a Tory seat.)

Badenoch says it is not up to her to decide; local parties choose their candidates, she says.

She says she wants “serious people” committed to public service as MPs.

Q: Do you want to see her selected?

Badenoch says Mordaunt was a “fantastic MP”. She says she was sorry she lost her seat, and is glad she wants to stand again.

But former MPs won’t get special treatment when candidates are being selected, she says. She says she wants candidate selection to be a “meritocracy”.

12m ago07.41 BSTBadenoch won't say whether speech tomorrow will include plan to cut inheritance taxQ: You are going to cut inheritance tax, aren’t you?

Badenoch says everyone knows she would like to do that. She has said that before.

But she won’t announce that unless she has found the money to pay for it.

Q: Will you have found the money by the time you give your speech tomorrow?

Badenoch tells Kay he will have to wait.

14m ago07.39 BSTBadenoch does not accept claims £10bn not enough to fund missile defenceJon Kay is interviewing Badenoch.

19m ago07.35 BSTBadenoch pays tribute to Jeffrey Archer, saying he sent her supportive text hours before he diedKemi Badenoch is on BBC Breakfast.

They start by asking about the death of Jeffrey Archer, and Badenoch says she got a message from him only yesterday morning. He said: “Great outfit, great speech, no need to reply.”

Badenoch says Archer was “a great communicator” and a “great storyteller”, and someone who believed in Conservatism.

Here is our story about his death.

Read moreShare23m ago07.30 BSTLib Dems say Tories would only be able to get 'Patchwork Dome' for £10bnThe Liberal Democrats have dismissed the Tory plan for a “Britannia Shield” as “Truss-style fantasy economics”. They say the Conservatives would only get a “Patchwork Dome” with the £10bn they plan to spend on the project.

James MacCleary, the Lib Dem defence spokesperson, said:

double quotation markOnce again the Conservatives are indulging in Truss-style fantasy economics. £10bn would not even touch the sides for a complete UK-wide ‘Iron Dome’. They either need to review their dodgy sums or come clean about which parts of the country their Patchwork Dome wouldn’t cover.

Let’s not forget this is the party that hollowed out our armed forces for a decade, and whose disgraceful plan to fill the defence-spending black hole is based on targeted cuts to the poorest and most vulnerable children. You do not make Britain safer by pushing families into poverty.

27m ago07.27 BSTWhat Tories are saying about how their proposed 'Britannia Shield' would workThis is what the Conservatives are saying about why the UK needs a “Britannia Shield” (their name for what they describe as a version of the “Iron Dome”), and who it would work.

double quotation markThe announcement comes as the threat of missile and drone attack against Britain and our allies continues to grow. Russia bombards Ukraine daily with ever more advanced drones and missiles, and they were behind a drone attack on Leipzig airport in August. Drones launched by Iranian proxies have hit our RAF base in Cyprus, and when Iran fired missiles at the Chagos islands earlier this year, it was the US who stepped in to launch interceptors. Nato allies, especially in the Baltic States, are suffering ever greater numbers of drone incursions and western intelligence agencies have warned that Russia could attack a Nato country by 2030.

We live in an increasingly dangerous and unpredictable world, where threats to the UK and our allies are growing in scale and complexity, yet Britain remains dangerously exposed. A report in November 2025 by the defence select committee warned that, compared to European allies investing heavily in integrated air and missile defence, the UK has “next to nothing”.

The Conservatives will close this dangerous capability gap by committing up to £10 billion over ten years. We will deliver a minimal deployable capability within our first term in office, with the remaining investment focused on expanding and strengthening the system over time.

Britannia Shield will have three key components:

SENSE: New advanced radar systems, to detect incoming missiles and drones.

DECIDE: Upgraded command and control systems to integrate information from across Britain’s defences and rapidly identify the most effective response.

EFFECT: New interceptor missiles, counter-drone capabilities, and significantly larger missile stockpiles to defeat incoming threats.

34m ago07.19 BSTPolitics Badenoch calls for UK ‘Iron Dome’ missile defence systemGood morning. Kemi Badenoch is doing a round of interviews this morning at the Conservative conference, and she will be talking about her plans for the UK to have its own version of Israel’s “Iron Dome” missile defence system. That phrase is not just journalists’ hype; it has come from the first line of the party’s press release, which says the party has plans for a “new integrated air and missile defence system to protect Britain from attack – in essence, a British ‘Iron Dome’.”

Here is our story by Jessica Elgot and Dan Sabbagh.

Read moreAnd this is what Badenoch is saying about it.

double quotation markThe first duty of government is to defend the country and keep people safe. Labour are failing that basic test.

The world will not wait for Britain to get ready. War has returned to Europe. Missiles and drones are transforming warfare in the Middle East. Cheap weapons can now threaten cities, military bases and critical infrastructure in ways that would have sounded like science fiction a generation ago.