URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/9/24/benjamin-netanyahu-attacks-israels-enemies-and-allies-in-un-speech
Al Jazeera (with AFP) — published 24 Sep 2026 22:32 BST (article timestamp 2026-09-24T22:32:39), last updated 25 Sep 2026 05:10 BST

HEADLINE: Benjamin Netanyahu attacks Israel's enemies and allies in UN speech

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has used his platform at the United Nations General Assembly to attack detractors and allies alike, and his presence sparked uproar in the chamber.

Speaking before the UNGA on Thursday, Netanyahu attacked New York City Mayor Zohran Mamdani, critics and Iran's leadership, as well as allied countries like the United Kingdom, Turkiye and France.

Back home, the prime minister is locked in a tight race to stay in power ahead of an October 27 election, and analysts say his UNGA speech was aimed as much at people back home as it was at international viewers.

Dozens of envoys from around the world walked out as the speech began, some jeering and booing, while Netanyahu's own team stood and applauded, and the speaker of the session shouted for order.

"If there are any other moral cowards who haven't left this hall, please do so now," Netanyahu said to those turning their backs on him.

He addressed the war that the US and Israel launched on Iran in February, saying: "Devastating Iran's nuclear facilities was hard, was very hard to do."
"But for me, it was one of the easiest decisions I've ever had to make as prime minister", claiming that if he had not, "we'd all be dead", he added.

In his own speech before the UNGA on Wednesday, Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian also addressed the nuclear issue and called out the "double standard".
"The nuclear weapon is in Israel, but the inspectors are in Iran. Israel kills, but Iran is subject to sanctions," Pezeshkian said.

Netanyahu on Thursday said that Israel was fighting a "seven-front war", including Gaza, the occupied West Bank, Syria, Lebanon, Iran, Yemen's Houthis and militias in Iraq.

"We are going to win. We have no other choice," Netanyahu declared, repeating the words of his older brother Yonatan Netanyahu, who was killed in 1976 during Operation Entebbe in Uganda.

In his speech, Netanyahu targeted Turkiye and its President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, among others, accusing Ankara of being a "spreader of anti-Semitic lies".

The Turkish presidency responded with a statement saying that Netanyahu's use of the UN platform to attack Erdogan was "incompatible with the ideals of peace, the rule of law and dialogue that the United Nations represents". It pointed to the International Criminal Court's arrest warrant against Netanyahu for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

"Netanyahu's outrageous and despicable remarks targeting President Erdogan cannot obscure his massacres, the humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza or the legal proceedings against him under international law," Presidential Communications Director Burhanettin Duran said in a statement posted on X.

The Turkish president addressed the UNGA himself on Tuesday, saying Israel's actions reflected a "genocidal mindset" and "state terrorism", and that Gaza had become "the most inhumane and shameful concentration camp of our time".

CRITICISING ALLIES
The United Kingdom and France, historic partners of Israel, were also in Netanyahu's firing line. They have become increasingly outspoken in their criticism of the country's actions and have both imposed limited sanctions on Israeli exports from the occupied West Bank.

"They accuse Israel, tiny Israel, of colonialism – some colonialism. And who's accusing us? Among them are people in Britain and in France. For God's sakes, they invented the term," he said.

But Netanyahu thanked his "friend", United States President Donald Trump.
"In this battle against the barbarians, we've had no greater partner than President Trump," he said, as the US delegation joined the Israeli one in applauding Netanyahu's remark.
"I thank him," said Netanyahu, adding that Israel and the US had acted together as pilots from both countries "flew joint missions over the skies of Iran".

Netanyahu said the US and Israel also "worked together to bring back our remaining hostages [from Gaza]", as he defended Israeli actions in the enclave against charges of genocide.

"To all those spreading lies about my country, whether they sit in this hall or in the office of the anti-Semitic mayor of New York, I say this: shame on you," Netanyahu said as he attacked Zohran Mamdani, who had previously said he would push for the arrest of the Israeli prime minister during his visit to the city.

"Mr Mamdani, you tried to stop me from coming here. You tried to silence me. Well, you can't silence me," Netanyahu said as he denied that Israel has committed genocide in Gaza.

Reacting to Netanyahu's comments, Mamdani called the accusations against him "baseless lies" meant to "sanitise his genocide of Palestinians".

The Hague-based International Criminal Court (ICC) said in 2024 it had reasonable grounds to believe Netanyahu was responsible for war crimes in Gaza, where over 73,000 Palestinians have been killed. Netanyahu denies the ICC charges.
[NOTE: NBC News on the same day put the Gaza death toll at "more than 75,000 people, according to Palestinian health officials". Al Jazeera says "over 73,000". Figures differ between outlets.]

Netanyahu attended the UNGA meeting despite an ICC warrant calling for his arrest. While he was welcomed, the Trump administration denied a visa for Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, who addressed the UNGA through a prerecorded video statement from Ramallah earlier in the day.

'WAR CRIMINAL'
As Netanyahu spoke, activists from US-based organisation Jewish Voice for Peace protested outside, accusing the United Nations of "playing host to a war criminal".
"All across New York, Jews, Palestinians and people of conscience are rising up to demand an end to US support for the livestreamed horrors, rigged ceasefires and forever wars," Sonya Meyerson-Knox, the group's communications director, told Al Jazeera.

Adding to tensions, dozens of protesters, some brandishing "stop the genocide" banners, gathered near the UN. Several demonstrators were detained, including prominent actor Susan Sarandon.

Inside the UN, but addressing divisions back home in Israel, Netanyahu said: "Throughout this long war, our goal never wavers – to win with unwavering resolve … What unites us is so much stronger: our history, our values, our courage."

Ariel Cohen, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council's Eurasia Center, said the Israeli prime minister delivered a "good speech" at the UNGA but that he did so in the "wrong forum".
"That speech should be given at an election rally in Israel; this is who he's communicating to," Cohen told Al Jazeera. "He is making points that should be made to the Israeli audience for his political survival."

Netanyahu is only making a whirlwind stop in New York before rushing back to Israel, where the election campaign is in full swing. He is not scheduled to meet any top US leaders.
