URL: https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2026/sep/25/daniel-thomas-court-charged-criminal-damage-dinghy-channel
The Guardian — published 14:28 BST, updated 17:25 BST, Friday 25 September 2026. By Kevin Rawlinson.
Headline: Daniel Thomas pleads not guilty after alleged dinghy slashing in Channel
Standfirst: Far-right activist who was filmed appearing to slash boat with blade is refused bail as he denies charges

The far-right agitator Daniel Thomas has pleaded not guilty to causing criminal damage after he was filmed apparently slashing a boat in the Channel with a blade while an emergency responder was onboard.

Thomas, 37, appeared at Basingstoke magistrates court on Friday morning. He also pleaded not guilty to failing to disclose to police the pin number of his phone, under section 53 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000.

The prosecutor Kevin Lucie, outlining the basis of the criminal damage charge, alleged Thomas slashed an adrift boat with a knife.

He told the court: "On 22 September, around 4.30pm, the defendant on his social platform livestreamed himself from a boat on the English Channel. He broadcast to a significant number of people a boat of migrants being supported by the RNLI in the English Channel. It was a single Rib [rigid inflatable boat] which was adrift.

"He armed himself with a knife. He slashed the boat."

Lucie said Thomas was arrested at a BP service station and taken into custody, where his mobile phone was seized but he allegedly refused to provide the pin code.

When asked about the boat, Lucie confirmed he was unsure if the damage was worth more or less than £5,000, and said: "Unfortunately, it is the case that it did go back to France. We have asked for the cost of the damage."

Thomas, also known as Danny Tommo, was REFUSED BAIL. The father of four, described as a professional roofer, was seen dabbing his eyes with a tissue at one point during the hearing.

He appeared for the hearing via video link, wearing a black top and grey coat, and spoke only to confirm his name and date of birth. He was supported in court by his teenage son, as well as fellow far-right activist Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, also known as Tommy Robinson.

On Thursday evening, several hundred people, many wearing black, gathered outside a police investigation centre in Basingstoke, apparently in the belief Thomas was inside. Dozens of police officers could be seen monitoring the group as the protest continued for several hours.

Thomas has said he would like a crown court trial. A hearing will take place in Portsmouth crown court on Tuesday 29 September.

His lawyer, Simon Pentol KC, said: "This defendant is not charged with an offence of political activism, whether you agree with it or not, that is not the issue. He has elected crown court trial over criminal damage simpliciter and nothing more, and for not acquiescing to a notice requiring him to provide a pin number."

He added: "I invite this court to bear in mind it's dealing with a 37-year-old man who lives with his long-standing partner and their four children, all aged between 18 and three, his partner is pregnant once again, four months. She is a full-time mother, he is the full-time provider, or breadwinner, as they used to say.

"He is a professional roofer by trade. He is, therefore, having to look after his family who, through his political activism, have been under huge threat and due to publication of his mother's home address, she has had to move home."
