URL: https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/dollar-set-weekly-gains-yields-surge-fed-bets-build-2026-09-25/

Dollar falls as oil cools but set for weekly gain; yen rallies (Reuters, 25 Sep 2026)

Summary: Dollar slips after rally as oil prices cool. Yen bounces from three-week low on intervention rhetoric. US currency strength persists on surging yields, rate hike bets. Euro heads for third weekly loss; sterling near three-month trough.

HONG KONG/LONDON, Sept 25 (Reuters) - The dollar fell on Friday but was on track for its second consecutive weekly gain on rising rate hike bets, while the yen rallied after Japan said Tokyo and Washington remain committed to the stance behind July's joint intervention.

The euro rose 0.2% to $1.141 as energy prices fell, moderating wagers on Federal Reserve rate increases, but was on track for a third weekly decline after touching a two-month low on Thursday.

Sterling rose 0.3% to $1.326, boosted by hawkish comments from Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey. Yet it remained close to a three-month low and was set for its second straight weekly 1% fall.

Markets have aggressively repriced the US interest rate trajectory after the Federal Reserve hiked last week. A global bond sell-off, which sent long-dated US Treasury yields to their highest in more than 20 years, also gave the greenback a leg up.

The dollar index climbed to a two-month high on Thursday and was set for its first back-to-back weekly increase since June. However, it gave back some of its recent gains and fell 0.3% on Friday to 100.96.

"Whilst the dollar should get a bid from higher yields, there are still ongoing, lingering concerns around the US fiscal position, the unpredictability of US policy making," said Khoon Goh, head of Asia research at ANZ. "I think that's why the dollar has really struggled to continue to rally, even though yields continue to increase."

Oil prices fell on Friday on signs of easing supply disruptions and hopes of progress in talks between the US and Iran. Yet crude remained close to highs as a Houthi missile attack on Saudi Arabia kept Middle East tensions high.

The offshore yuan was flat at 6.721 per dollar, as the Trump-Xi summit in Washington showed no signs of breakthroughs at a closed-door meeting on thorny issues such as AI, trade, Taiwan and the Iran war.
