URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2026/9/25/us-seeking-to-revive-russia-ukraine-ceasefire-talks
Al Jazeera (with Reuters) — published 25 Sep 2026 13:09 BST, updated ~15:43 BST

The United States is working to arrange a new round of talks in a bid to end the four-and-a-half-year Russia-Ukraine war. Kyiv and Moscow both confirmed the plan to relaunch trilateral talks on Friday. The move follows negotiations that started earlier this year before the US efforts to broker an end to hostilities petered out amid Washington's war on Iran.

The United Arab Emirates is mooted as the host of the new talks.

"The American side has proposed meeting at a technical level in a three-way format," Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy told reporters. "We are awaiting a proposal from the United States regarding the date and the US has suggested the Emirates as a possible location."

Later, the Kremlin confirmed that a trilateral meeting could be soon, although spokesman Dmitry Peskov said there were no details to add currently.

Trump's envoys Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner visited Russia and Ukraine earlier this month in a bid to jump-start the bid to secure a ceasefire. Russia's presidential envoy Kirill Dmitriev reportedly met Witkoff and Kushner in the US on September 24. Peskov said those talks were about potential economic cooperation.

DEFENCE AID
Zelenskyy said Trump told him Ukraine will be granted permission to produce advanced Patriot air defence missiles. Should a licence be issued, it would be more than a year before Kyiv could put any new Patriot systems into service.

"In recent days, during our meetings, Ukraine has openly informed our partners: Russia will only escalate as winter approaches unless there is pressure," Zelenskyy wrote on X on Friday. "For diplomacy to work, US sanctions must be implemented and European sanctions must be strengthened."

European Union member countries agreed on Friday to release $7.5 billion in EU funds linked to military aid for Ukraine. Kaja Kallas, vice president of the European Commission, said the money will come from the European Peace Facility and will go towards joint procurement of equipment. "Moscow's hybrid attacks try to intimidate Europe into scaling back its support for Ukraine. Europe is doing the opposite," she said.

ATTACKS
Ukraine's Air Force said it shot down 267 out of 295 drones launched by Russia overnight.
Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko said at least five people, including a 14-year-old boy, were killed in Russian strikes on the capital on Friday. Another 31 were injured, including 15 receiving hospital treatment in Kyiv.
In the southern Odesa region, Governor Oleh Kiper said one person was killed and another injured in a series of "massive" Russian strikes on a residential area and logistics premises of a postal operator.
Steelmaker ArcelorMittal said it was shutting production at Ukraine's largest steel plant after four strikes in five weeks caused extensive damage and killed five workers at the southeastern plant.
Russian emergency services said one person was killed and one wounded in a drone attack on a market near the Russian-controlled town of Horlivka in Donetsk region, according to TASS.
Russia said its air defence units destroyed about 50 drones over the Rostov region overnight and a drone attack damaged the Novoshakhtinsk oil refinery, forcing it to suspend operations.
Dmitry Makhonin, governor of Russia's Perm region, said air defences shot down 39 drones during overnight strikes, which killed one person.
Aleksandr Gusev, governor of Voronezh, said 13 people were injured in the regional capital and debris from downed drones damaged several non-residential and industrial buildings.
Ukraine recently struck two other major Russian oil refineries in Moscow and Yaroslavl. Zelenskyy asserted refineries in Bashkortostan and the Samara region had also been hit in the past 24 hours.
Zelenskyy also reported unspecified strikes in the Black Sea, and said he has held talks with India, Turkiye, Egypt and other Middle Eastern countries concerning efforts to unblock shipping in the Black Sea, where Russia has targeted cargo vessels.
