URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cqwyzz79mdgjo
BBC News — published 17:04 BST, Friday 25 September 2026 (cXenseParse:publishtime 2026-09-25T16:04:05Z)
Headline: I'm not tempted to call an early election, Burnham says
By Richard Wheeler and Joshua Nevett, Political reporter

Andy Burnham has told the BBC he is not tempted to call an early general election and there will not be one "anytime soon".

The prime minister said his focus was on helping people with the cost of living and supporting businesses, rather than "throwing the country into a backward-looking process".

Recent polling has suggested Labour's position has improved since Burnham replaced Sir Keir Starmer in Downing Street in July, although Reform UK and the Conservatives are not far behind.

An early general election could give Burnham a mandate of his own and free him from commitments made in Labour's 2024 manifesto. The next general election must be held by August 2029.

Burnham heads to his first Labour Party conference as prime minister this weekend, with speculation over the prospect of a snap election likely to be a topic of conversation among some of those attending the event in Liverpool.

Labour has been projected to lose its majority but remain the largest party in the House of Commons if there was a snap election, according to recent polling.

It comes amid media reports that some of the PM's advisers have been weighing up the prospect of an election as early as next year.

But Burnham sought to rule out this prospect during interviews with BBC regional political editors ahead of the conference opening on Sunday.

Asked by BBC West political editor Paul Barltrop whether he was tempted to call an early poll, Burnham replied: "No, not particularly. No, I'm not.

"I see all the speculation and it just races ahead," he said.

He added: "No election anytime soon. I'm focused on the job as prime minister, doing what I said I would do."

He was later asked by BBC East Midlands political editor Peter Saull if there would be a general election next May, alongside council elections in the area.

The PM replied "no" before adding: "Not having a general election."

Burnham also said he wants to use the conference to say more about "the direction I want to take the country in", adding: "The focus is on that, helping people with the cost of living, helping businesses with the cost of running a business.

"These have got to be the priorities right now, rather than throwing the country into a backward-looking process where we're arguing again amongst ourselves."

Burnham said he wanted to ensure people are "feeling a bit of hope in their lives again", adding: "That's what I'm trying to do, and I hope to take it further in the coming period, rather than putting people back into an election cycle."
