URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c6kg090rx2kdo
BBC News — first published 10:39 BST, updated 17:18 BST, Friday 25 September 2026 (modified 2026-09-25T16:18:51Z)
Headline: Glasgow City Council pauses plan to fire and rehire 23,000 staff

Glasgow City Council has agreed to pause plans to fire and rehire more than 23,000 members of staff, the BBC has been told.

The decision follows online talks between the council and three trade unions, chaired by Deputy First Minister Jenny Gilruth.

It is understood that negotiations between the council and the GMB, Unison and Unite unions will resume early next week to try to reach a new deal on pay.

Letters which had been due to be sent to staff informing them of the fire and rehire plans will not be issued.

The SNP-led council had threatened to sack thousands of members of staff and then rehire them on new contracts after negotiations with unions over equal pay proposals broke down.

The talks were about the council's plans to replace a pay system found to discriminate against mostly women workers. The changes would see the majority of staff unaffected or better off, but they would cut pay for 11% of staff.

Gilruth said the Scottish government did not support fire and rehire schemes and had urged the council and trade unions to get back around the negotiating table.

One Glasgow City Council worker had earlier described the situation as "heartbreaking". Joanne, a support for learning worker from Glasgow, said the local authority "had a cheek to say they care about their employees". She will lose about £300 per year. She said: "I came away from my work crying - really, really upset. I couldn't believe that after 25 years' service to Glasgow City Council, I am getting let down yet again."

At a meeting last month, the council agreed to an overhaul of its pay and grading structure after eight years of negotiations. The council has previously paid over £770m to 19,000 claimants after it emerged that female workers in roles such as catering or cleaning were paid less than those in male-dominated areas such as refuse collection.

The new system would see 63% of those affected gain financially, while 11% would have their wages reduced. Some roles moved onto lower salaries, with the highest drop in wages expected to be around £11,500.

Every member of non-teaching staff employed by the council was to be issued with a letter of dismissal, including chief executive Susanne Millar, nursery staff and refuse collectors. They would then be offered new contracts, set to begin on 1 January. Changes to UK-wide employment law come into effect on the same date, making dismissing an employee for refusing to accept contract changes automatically an unfair dismissal.

Talks between the council and the GMB, Unison and Unite unions fell apart on Wednesday when Unison said it would not ballot its members on a proposed new pay offer. The council said its new proposals would protect workers set to lose out for an extra six months, and accused Unison of "betraying" members.

Unison's education convener Sylvia Haughey told BBC Radio Scotland Breakfast the council was using "bullying tactics". She said: "We haven't betrayed anyone, we certainly haven't betrayed our members. We are out fighting for our members. We are fighting for the members who are... losing big financial amounts, whether its £200 or £12,000. We have not walked away from anything. We are willing to speak to the council at any time."

Glasgow City Council's communications director, Colin Edgar, said it was a "hellish situation" that "almost no one" wanted to be in. He told BBC Scotland News: "Our staff are going to be distressed, they're going to be anxious. I can reassure them that when their contracts end and restart the next day there will be no break in their continuity of service. They will all be rehired."

The GMB and Unite unions both criticised the decision to go ahead with fire and re-hire, with Unite calling it a "scandalous threat". Before the announcement both unions said they had secured an extra £110m to be added into the salary structure. Unison said the extra funding was for "assimilation and arrears".

The UK government's Scottish Secretary, Douglas Alexander, said the council's action comes just months before UK government legislation will make fire and rehire schemes illegal, a move he called "the biggest upgrade to workers' rights in a generation." He added: "The council leadership should get back around the table today and find a better way forward."
