URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cmq8j904212po
BBC News (Hugh Schofield in Paris) — updated 25 Sep 2026 16:06 BST

Pope Leo XIV has issued a warning about the dangers of artificial intelligence at the start of his four-day visit to France.

The pontiff cautioned against "losing our humanity amid a paradise of machines" in wide-ranging remarks to Church and state officials at the Elysee Palace, following an hour of talks with President Emmanuel Macron.

Leo made a similar warning earlier this year when he spoke of the need for AI to be "disarmed" in the first major teaching document of his papacy. In his May appeal, he mentioned the slave trade in relation to AI, suggesting the world was in danger of normalising the exploitation of people once again.

The highpoint of Leo's visit is set to be a giant Mass attended by more than half a million people in Paris on Saturday, for which an altar has been built on the Place de la Concorde and a large area around the Champs-Elysees sealed off by police.

He was greeted at Orly airport early on Friday by Macron, with the pair expected to deliver a speech later in the day in Metz. Crowds were gathering along a route to Notre Dame, where the pontiff will later be driven in his popemobile. The president will not be at any of the Pope's Masses, largely to avoid breaching France's strict separation of state and religion.

On Friday, Macron hailed Pope Leo's visit to France as a "great honour", stressing that French secularism "in no way negates religion". Leo said that "authentic secularity" should not exclude religion "from the public sphere or from education". In recent years, French politicians have often invoked France's brand of secularism to justify bans on religious symbols, including Muslim women's attire, in public spaces and schools.

The Champs-Elysees Mass will be attended by Macron's wife Brigitte and Prime Minister Sebastien Lecornu. Several candidates for next year's presidential election are also due, including Marine Le Pen of the nationalist right, centrists Edouard Philippe and Gabriel Attal, and conservative Bruno Retailleau.

Elysee officials confirmed that Pope Leo turned down Macron's idea of a meeting with artisans who helped rebuild the fire-devastated Notre-Dame cathedral, because his agenda was too tight.

After a Popemobile ride to Notre-Dame on Friday afternoon, Pope Leo XIV will be joined in the evening by 80,000 young people at the Stade de France. On Sunday 150,000 have signed up to attend mass in the Pyrenean sanctuary of Lourdes. On Monday the Pope will be in Metz, where he will pay tribute to Robert Schuman (1886-1963), a founding father of the European Union and a candidate for beatification. The Pope will also meet a group of migrants in Paris, and in Lourdes some victims of sexual abuse by members of the Catholic clergy.

Born in Chicago in 1955, Pope Leo XIV was originally called Robert Prevost — a French name. His paternal grandmother was born in Le Havre in Normandy in 1894.

Less than half of France's population identifies as Catholic. The number of regular worshippers has fallen from 35% of the population in 1960 to less than 5% today, while the number of priests has shrunk by two-thirds from 25,000 in 1990 to fewer than 9,000. Adult baptisms have more than doubled in five years to hit 10,000 in 2025.

"France has indeed secularised, but there is a void where God and values used to be," said Cardinal Francois Bustillo, Bishop of Ajaccio. "People are searching for something. Maybe they go to India or Tibet or the Amazon. And now the Pope comes here from Rome, bringing a reminder to people of their own roots. It was John-Paul II who awoke the East. Now Leo XIV will awake the West."
