URL: https://www.theguardian.com/news/2026/sep/25/mosques-emergency-security-funding-home-office-southport-disorder
The Guardian — published 14:50 BST, updated 17:22 BST, Friday 25 September 2026. By Neha Gohil. EXCLUSIVE.
Headline: Mosques given £66m in emergency security funds after Southport disorder

A record £66m of emergency security funding was issued by the Home Office for mosques and related community sites in the UK when violent disorder spread in the aftermath of the Southport attacks in 2024.

Exclusive figures obtained by the Guardian also reveal a record of about £41m in security funding was issued for mosques and related community sites for the year from April 2025-26 as part of the protective security scheme.

The chief executive of the British Muslim Trust, the government's partner for monitoring anti-Muslim hatred, said the figures "tell an incredibly sombre story about the rise in anti-Muslim hostility that British Muslims are living with".

"Security needs are increasing as a direct response to the increase in attacks that mosques are under," Akeela Ahmed said. "If we want to bring down the costs for protecting British Muslims in the UK then we need to reduce the need for protection and address the root causes of hate against Muslim communities."

The trust published data in July showing that one mosque was attacked every five days across Britain in the past year.

The government launched a security scheme for places of worship in 2016 for England and Wales, and in 2023 it created a dedicated scheme worth £29.4m for mosques and faith schools in the UK.

According to figures obtained via a freedom of information request, the security funding issued for mosques, Islamic faith schools and associated sites was £73,147 in 2016-17, before increasing to about £3m in 2022-23, £29m in 2024-25 and a record of about £41m in 2025-26.

The Home Office introduced a separate emergency security scheme as a temporary measure for places of worship when violent disorder spread across cities after a knife attack in Southport in 2024 in which three girls at a dance class were murdered. Of the almost £69m granted to places of worship in the UK as part of this scheme, about £66m was issued to mosques and associated sites.

Shaista Gohir, the chief executive of Muslim Women's Network UK, said the figures created "the impression that substantial action is being taken to tackle anti-Muslim hostility" but the government's response remained "limited compared with the scale of the problem".

"There is little visible action to address the safety of Muslim women, and most of the funding doesn't even appear to reach mosques or other community sites. One mosque leader I spoke to recently had to apply several times and still only received funding for some requested measures. Many others are still waiting for decisions," Gohir said.

The Jami community centre in Birmingham has reported at least five incidents relating to hate crime and racially aggravated criminal damage between March and July this year, according to West Midlands police.

Khalid, a volunteer at the centre, said: "We've had the Prevent team from the council coming here. We've had the imam being verbally abused. There's people being verbally abused … What are we waiting for? Like a disaster to happen?" He added: "The centre feels that they're not being supported enough. More needs to be done. No one should ever feel unsafe coming to pray."

Paulette Hamilton, the MP for Birmingham Erdington, said she was "deeply concerned" by the attacks on the centre. "It's absolutely hateful. I think the people who are doing it are cowardly and there is no place for that sort of thing in the constituency."

The Home Office said it was working to process all applications for security funding as soon as possible. "To help protect Muslim communities from the appalling levels of hate crime they face, the government has made £40m available through protective security schemes. This is part of a record £77.4m investment in security funding for faith communities in 2026-27," a spokesperson said.
