URL: https://news.sky.com/story/nhs-staff-face-immediate-suspension-for-snooping-on-patient-medical-data-13591773
Sky News — Friday 25 September 2026 15:39 BST. By Ashish Joshi, Health correspondent
Headline: NHS staff face immediate suspension for 'snooping' on patient medical data

NHS staff have been warned they face immediate suspension if they are caught inappropriately accessing patient information.

NHS CEO Sir Jim Mackey wrote to NHS Trust leaders, saying: "We have seen too many cases of people abusing that trust, and enough is enough.

"If someone is suspected of snooping, we cannot leave them in post with access to patients' records while an investigation takes days or weeks.

"From now on, we will expect them to be suspended and have their access to NHS systems cut off immediately, while the facts are established."

This urgent intervention follows a Sky News investigation exposing the scale of the problem in the health service.

Southport attack survivor Leanne Lucas had her medical records inappropriately accessed and was not told by the hospital until two years after the breach.

Responding to the move, she told Sky News: "I'm really pleased to see that people in these positions have listened to us and they're taking it seriously".

She added that she would like to see more detail about the changes, and in the future there needs to be "more staff training, more accountability".

"I think suspension, whilst there's an investigation, is step number one, but there's a lot more policies and procedures that need to be looked into," she said. "Just take my case, for example, how you deliver this information to the victim? I'm not sure what change is being done there."

In June Sky News reported that a three-year-old who was attacked by a crocodile after being pushed into a reptile enclosure had their records inappropriately accessed by NHS staff.

Sky News uncovered thousands of cases investigated by NHS Trusts in the past five years, but very few are referred to the Information Commissioner's Office and most staff are given minor sanctions such as verbal or written warnings.

Sky News also revealed that staff working for the Ministry of Justice inappropriately accessed court records relating to the Southport attack, and Nottingham University Hospital's maternity data error that has wiped their ability to find out who accessed patient records between 2011 and 2022.

FROM SIR JIM MACKEY'S LETTER TO NHS TRUST LEADERS (full text published by Sky News):
"You will share my disappointment and anger at the numerous and widespread reports that NHS staff members have accessed confidential patient information without any legitimate reason to do so, particularly given the new guidance and communications toolkit we launched in July.

"Unauthorised, inappropriate and unjustifiable access to confidential patient information by NHS employees is unlawful, massively damages patient and public confidence in the NHS and represents a serious failure of our duty to protect the privacy of patients. We all know this is unacceptable and we must do all we can to prevent these incidents.

"Patients must be able to trust that their personal information is kept confidential by the NHS and the outrage reflected by the public on this issue is entirely understandable. It is particularly galling that the actions of a minority of staff are tarnishing the reputation of the majority of our colleagues who take pride in delivering the best care for patients.

"I have reassured the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care that we intend to take a zero tolerance approach to tackling this problem, driven by a shared understanding across the NHS that, in almost all cases, such unauthorised access to patient records constitutes gross misconduct, and that our actions as employers must now reflect the severity of wrongdoing when patient confidentiality is breached.

"Danny Mortimer, Director General for People, has set out updated advice to reflect this new approach in the annex to this letter. Please ensure you implement this approach with immediate effect.

"Public confidence in the NHS has improved over the last year in line with the very real improvements we've seen in patient care: this behaviour sets us back and cannot be tolerated. As a leadership community we must now move as one to eradicate it."
— Sir Jim Mackey, Chief Executive Officer, NHS England

Sky News research uncovered 2,914 data breach cases investigated by NHS Trusts since 2021. Of these only 409 data breach cases were referred to the ICO by NHS Trusts. Some 67% of data breach cases in NHS Trusts result in a minor sanction such as informal, verbal or written warning or no further action. Of the 134 trusts who responded to Sky News Freedom of Information requests, only 54 said they routinely looked for potential breaches.
