URL: https://news.sky.com/story/politics-latest-burnham-un-speech-new-york-trump-chagos-12593360
Sky News Politics Hub live blog — last updated Friday 25 September 2026 15:15 BST (entries timestamped below)
Headline: Politics latest: Burnham 'not tempted' to call early election

--- 16:01 BST (blog shows 12:01 in its own clock; BBC published the same lines 17:04 BST) ---
BURNHAM 'NOT TEMPTED' TO CALL EARLY ELECTION
Andy Burnham says he is "not tempted" to call an early election.
Asked by BBC West, he said: "Not particularly. No, I'm not. And I see all the speculation and it just races ahead. And, you know, the media love to do that.
"No, no election any time soon. I'm focused on the job as prime minister doing what I said I would do."
He said he would give more details at his speech at the Labour Party Conference in Liverpool next week of his priorities and set out the "direction I want to take the country in the coming period".
"These have got to be the priorities right now rather than throwing the country into a backward looking process where we're arguing again among ourselves, the time has come, draw a line, get the country looking forward, pulling together, people feeling a bit of hope in their lives again, that's what I'm trying to do, and I hope to take it further in the coming period rather than putting people back into an election cycle," he said.
Asked by ITV if the next general election will be in 2029 - the latest he can call one under the five-year term rule following Labour's landslide in the 2024 election - he said: "Well, yes, that's that's when the next election will be. All of this speculation on an early election, I can knock that dead.
"You know people want me new in office to be getting on with the job of delivering on the things that we've discussed in this interview rather than putting self-serving politics before that, which was what I would be doing if I call an election, I'm not going to do that."

--- 09:43 BST ---
SMALL BOATS: HOME OFFICE FIGURES
The Home Office has released the latest data for small boat crossings. Figures for Thursday show 44 people crossed the Channel in one small boat.
It comes after Wednesday's figure broke the record for the highest number of migrants to arrive in a single day in 2026. A total of 781 people successfully crossed the Channel in 10 small boats.
It surpassed the previous record for 2026, which was recorded on 29 July when 752 people crossed the Channel in 9 small boats.

--- 08:45 BST ---
YOUGOV POLLING AHEAD OF LABOUR CONFERENCE
Britons tend to view the Labour Party negatively, despite Andy Burnham's personal popularity, new polling shows. Data compiled by YouGov ahead of the party's annual conference beginning on Sunday shows Labour holds a negative net score of -25.
A majority of people believe Labour is "out of touch" (53%), "untrustworthy" (50%) and "unclear what they stand for".
YouGov's survey, carried out between 19 and 21 September, also found only one in five people - 20% - believe the party is "trustworthy," and a quarter (25%) said it is "competent". Almost half (43%) said they believe Labour is "moderate" and not "extreme".
Roughly a third (32-35%) of those who backed Labour in 2024 said they feel unclear what the party stands for or say it feels out of touch. A further 28% said they feel the party is weak.

--- 08:11 BST ---
YOUGOV: THREE WORDS PEOPLE ASSOCIATE WITH BURNHAM
43% of respondents were likely to give at least one positive description; 42% were likely to use at least one negative phrase.
Most popular positive descriptions: "down to earth" (6%), "fresh and different" (5%), "is generally likeable" (4%).
Most popular negative phrases: "useless" (6%), "inexperienced"/"out of his depth" (4%), "deluded"/"disappointing" (2%). 3% said "like the rest"/"just another politician". Almost a quarter (23%) used neutral terms, the most common being "northern" (7%).

--- 07:39 BST ---
TRANSPORT SECRETARY ON AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL REVIEW
Transport Secretary Heidi Alexander has said she wants "answers" into what went wrong with air traffic control over the UK earlier this month. NATS appeared to suffer an IT glitch on 8 September, leading to around 2,000 flights being cancelled. A provisional report by the company blamed a "software defect".
The UK Civil Aviation Authority has published the terms of its independent review. An initial report will be provided in January, and the full report on 8 March 2027, exactly six months after the incident. The CAA also says it will appoint an "independent challenge panel" with approval from Alexander.
Alexander said: "In recent weeks, passengers and airlines have been let down too many times, and I'm determined to get to the bottom of why. This review sets the bar high, and I expect answers and action as a result. Passengers deserve an aviation system that works, and this government will ensure our national infrastructure is fit for the future, so people can get to where they need to be."

--- 04:59 BST ---
MINISTERS TO BRIEF COMPANY BOSSES ON RUSSIA THREAT
Bosses of companies considered critical to UK security will be briefed by ministers on the threats posed by Russia. Security minister Dan Jarvis will chair a meeting of representatives from businesses classed as critical national infrastructure (CNI) — communications firms, civil nuclear power, energy companies and water providers. Armed forces minister Louise Sandher-Jones will invite representatives from the defence sector.
It follows Burnham's UN General Assembly speech warning the UK has experienced "cyber-attacks on our companies and institutions" and that "AI will multiply that threat". The PM said: "Russian agencies have used every means at their disposal to spread lies and disinformation and prey on people's fears."
Sandher-Jones said: "Russia is actively seeking to disrupt the organisations that form the bedrock of our national security. By bringing government and defence industry leaders together, we can deepen our shared understanding of the threat and strengthen our collective resilience."
Jarvis said he will "share world-class intelligence with some of the most important organisations in the country, to ensure they understand and are prepared for the threats we face". It's understood the meetings will be held in the coming weeks.

--- 05:57 BST (Kremlin reaction, Wednesday) ---
Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin's spokesperson, told journalists on Wednesday: "Stoking anti-Russian sentiment and fostering an atmosphere of total Russophobia is what Britain is doing."

--- 02:53 BST ---
HARMAN: PM 'MUST ADDRESS IMMIGRATION' IN CONFERENCE SPEECH
Labour peer Baroness Harriet Harman told Sky's Beth Rigby on the Electoral Dysfunction podcast that Burnham "absolutely has to" address immigration in his conference speech on Tuesday, otherwise "everybody who wants to make immigration a huge issue" will be saying, "see, he didn't even mention immigration". The public "expect him to show that, as prime minister, what he's going to do is control the borders, but also control the streets".

--- Yesterday 15:10 BST ---
'BIG POSSIBILITY' OF EARLY ELECTION — FORMER LABOUR ADVISER
Liz Bates, adviser to Steve Reed in the Starmer administration: "What I have noticed in this first period of him as prime minister is he keeps saying, 'I'll have another look at that, we're not really sure'. He's on the fence on so many issues, and you can only do that for so long. We've got a budget coming up, before that, we've got Labour conference. He's going to have to start standing up and saying what he believes in... And that is why I still think that there's a big possibility of an early general election, because once you start making decisions, that honeymoon period is over."
