URL: https://www.nbcnews.com/world/israel/israel-netanyahu-united-nations-general-assembly-gaza-iran-war-rcna599576
NBC News — published Sept 24 2026, 8:03 AM EDT / updated Sept 24 2026, 4:56 PM EDT (21:56 BST Thu 24 Sep)

HEADLINE: Israel's Netanyahu takes the U.N. stage facing global isolation and a fight for his political future

TEL AVIV — Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu pleaded his country's case to the world at the United Nations General Assembly on Thursday before an audience of mostly empty seats.

As Netanyahu stepped up to the lectern, hundreds of diplomats showed their disdain for Israel's bloody crackdown on Palestinians in Gaza by rising from their seats and walking out en masse.

Then Netanyahu went on to revisit Hamas' attacks on Israel in October 2023, in which about 1,200 people were killed and which sparked the latest round of fighting.

And, as expected, he accused New York Mayor Zohran Mamdani of antisemitism and cozying up to what he said were his Hamas "buddies."

And he attacked critics of Israel's actions in Gaza, which have resulted in the deaths of more than 75,000 people, according to Palestinian health officials.

Netanyahu also suggested that soaring settler violence in the West Bank, a growing threat to Palestinian communities there, was the work of "a handful of young juvenile delinquents."

Netanyahu arrived in New York on a whirlwind trip that highlighted Israel's growing isolation over its assault on the Gaza Strip.

With only a handful of diplomatic meetings on the sidelines of the assembly and Trump's focus firmly on his summit with China's Xi Jinping, Netanyahu was expected to return to Israel shortly after his address to be back in time for the major Jewish holiday of Sukkot on Friday evening.

"I am leaving tonight for New York in order to defend, from the U.N. podium, Israel and IDF soldiers," he said in a video Wednesday night before he left.

While much of the world has condemned Israel for the huge loss of civilian life and the continuing humanitarian tragedy in Gaza, Netanyahu's primary domestic challenge comes from an Israeli right wing that accuses him of not being tough enough in the multifront war on Iran and its proxy groups.

In a video Tuesday on social media, Netanyahu took aim at Mamdani, who had pledged to arrest him for crimes against humanity before he later acknowledged that he lacked jurisdiction. Appearing to adopt the posture of a professional wrestler and looking straight into the camera, Netanyahu accused Mamdani of supporting Hamas — which Mamdani has strenuously denied — and fomenting riots against New York Jews.

Netanyahu's mention of Israeli soldiers appeared to be a reference to "NAZA," a documentary made by two Israeli filmmakers in which 24 anonymous Israelis, described as military and intelligence officials, talk about the cynical process by which the country's military evaluated the need for civilian deaths during the Gaza war. Politicians have stumbled over themselves to publicly condemn the documentary, with some demanding a criminal investigation into the duo and even that they be stripped of Israeli citizenship.

For this speech, Netanyahu held up a pager similar to the explosive-laden devices the Israelis used to kill dozens of Hezbollah supporters in 2024. [Photo caption: "Netanyahu holds up a Starlink device Thursday."]

He also wore an oversized QR code on his jacket, encouraging audiences to activate the code to visit a website with a video showing Hamas' attacks on Israel in October 2023.

Photo caption: Delegates leave as Benjamin Netanyahu speaks Thursday at the U.N. — John Lamparski / Bloomberg via Getty Images

Reported by Matt Bradley (Tel Aviv) and Corky Siemaszko (New York City).
