URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c62r04rp637o
TITLE: Newspaper headlines: 'Labour rivals want to rejoin EU' and 'survival of the fittest'
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-16T23:20Z (updated 2026-05-17T05:25Z)

The position of Wes Streeting and Andy Burnham on rejoining the European Union dominate Sunday's papers. Both Streeting and Burnham, who are both expected to try to replace Sir Keir Starmer as leader, would seek to rejoin the EU if they were to become prime minister, the Sunday Telegraph reports.

Reform UK leader Nigel Farage has said Burnham as PM would "betray every Brexit voter in the constituency", the paper reports.

In an exclusive interview with the Daily Mirror, Burnham has detailed his plans "to build a fairer Britain", including more public control over "life's essentials" like water and energy, as well as more council house buildings. The Greater Manchester mayor told the paper: "Britain needs to build new politics. We want to listen to what people are saying."

The Mail headlines on Wes Streeting turning the screw "on Burnham over Brexit". Streeting confirmed yesterday he would enter any potential Labour leadership contest. The former health secretary has plans for Britain to rejoin the EU if he becomes prime minister, the paper says.

The Sunday Times leads on Streeting entering the race for a new UK prime minister by announcing his support for Britain rejoining the EU. The former health secretary said Labour "should seek a new mandate for rejoining in its manifesto" during the next general election.

The Observer: "Survival of the fittest" — Larry, the Downing Street cat, has outlasted six prime ministers and counting.

Dan Hodges writes in the Mail On Sunday that Sir Keir Starmer has told close friends that he intends to stand down and set out a timetable for his departure. A cabinet minister is quoted: "he realises the current chaos is unsustainable", and will leave in a "manner of his own choosing".

The Sunday Express claims that Iranian spying operations on UK soil are responsible for the highest number of hostile state activity investigations. A senior counter-terror officer tells the paper there are record levels of investigative casework on terror plots, espionage and state-level threats to individuals.
