URL: https://understandingwar.org/research/russia-ukraine/russian-offensive-campaign-assessment-may-16-2026/
TITLE: Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 16, 2026
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-17T00:29Z
AUTHOR: Adam Grace (ISW)

KEY TAKEAWAYS:
1. The seniormost Russian military command presented a highly inaccurate assessment of the battlefield situation for the fifth consecutive month, absurdly claiming that Russian forces are advancing west of Kupyansk, which they have not, in fact, taken.

2. Russian Chief of the General Staff Army General Valery Gerasimov met with the Russian Western Grouping of Forces on May 16 and made a series of false claims about the situation in the Kupyansk, Borova, and Lyman directions. Gerasimov claimed Russian forces are advancing west of Kupyansk toward Shevchenkove, "a statement inaccurately implying that Russian forces have seized Kupyansk and hold positions further west of the town". Gerasimov also claimed Russian forces entered Velyka Shapkivka, seized all of Borova and Kutkivka; and seized about 50 percent of Shyikivka and 85 percent of Lyman.

3. ISW has observed evidence to assess that Russian forces have only infiltrated within about 14.2 percent of Kupyansk, 6.5 percent of Kutkivka, and 0.06 percent of Lyman.

4. "These aggrandized claims of fictional advances along with milblogger complaints may indicate that the highest echelon of the Russian military command is either unaware of or unwilling to admit the realities of the battlefield even to itself, and is therefore allowing its own falsehoods to influence Russian operational and strategic planning."

5. Russian milbloggers continue to warn that Ukrainian counterattacks and false reports of advances in other areas of the frontline are creating difficult situations to which the Russian military command cannot adequately respond.

6. The Kremlin continues to expand its passportization efforts in Transnistria — the pro-Russian breakaway region of Moldova — to deepen Russian influence in the region. Putin signed a decree on May 15 simplifying the procedure for Transnistria residents to acquire Russian citizenship.

7. Ukrainian forces advanced in the Hulyaipole direction.

8. Russian forces launched 294 drones toward Ukraine overnight. Ukrainian forces downed 269. 20 drones struck 15 locations; debris fell at nine locations. Russian forces struck civilian, residential, and transport infrastructure in Kharkiv and Poltava cities and Kyiv and Dnipropetrovsk oblasts. Russian forces struck port, residential and critical infrastructure in Odesa Oblast, cutting power to 39 settlements and 22,662 subscribers.

9. Ukrainian forces struck the Azot chemical plant in Nevinnomyssk, Stavropol Krai — southern Russia's largest chemical plant and Russia's largest producer of nitrogen fertilizers and ammonia used to make explosives. Plant is roughly 540 kilometres from the frontline.
