URL: https://www.telegraph.co.uk/politics/2026/05/16/burnham-and-streeting-want-to-rejoin-eu/
TITLE: Burnham and Streeting want to rejoin the EU
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-16T20:45Z
AUTHORS: Camilla Turner (Sunday Political Editor), Sabrina Miller (Whitehall Correspondent), Dominic Penna (Senior Political Correspondent)

Andy Burnham and Wes Streeting would both seek a mandate to rejoin the European Union if they were elected Labour Party leader, in a move that would threaten to reopen Britain's Brexit wounds.

In a speech on Saturday, Mr Streeting called for the UK to rejoin the European Union, saying that "Britain's future lies with Europe". The former health secretary described leaving the EU as a "catastrophic mistake", adding that Britain needed a new "special relationship" with the trading bloc.

Mr Burnham's allies told The Telegraph that he stood by his stance of wanting to rejoin the EU in due course. Speaking at the Labour conference last year, Mr Burnham said: "Long term, I'm going to be honest, I'm going to say it, I want to rejoin it. Look, I hope in my lifetime I see this country rejoin the European Union."

Sources close to Mr Burnham said he respected the will of the British people, and would require a fresh mandate to reverse the position on Brexit. His focus was on domestic issues that he felt needed to be addressed more urgently.

CAMPAIGN TRAIL: Andy Burnham joined Lisa Nandy, the Culture Secretary, on the campaign trail in Winstanley, Greater Manchester, on Saturday. (First Cabinet minister to do so.)

Asked by ITV News on Saturday whether he was in favour of rejoining the EU, Mr Burnham said "in the long term there is a case for that" but sought to downplay this ahead of his Makerfield campaign, saying he was "not advocating that in this by-election".

The Telegraph understands that Reform UK will make "Brexit betrayal" one of its key attack lines in the by-election campaign, and intends to print Mr Burnham's words about the EU on its leaflets.

Mr Burnham used an interview with Channel 4 News to call for the UK to go down a "completely" different path to the past 40 years, which would involve putting "more things back under stronger public control". "Margaret Thatcher deregulated the whole country," he said. "The country gave away its control of the basic things that people depend upon every day. And that was a big mistake, in my view."

Mr Farage told The Telegraph: "He would be a disaster for the economy and betray every Brexit voter in the constituency. 'Open borders Burnham' must be stopped."

Kevin Hollinrake, the Conservative Party chairman, said: "Whilst Labour re-litigate Brexit, Britain is not being governed."

Streeting at Progress conference: "In 2026, the British people increasingly see that in a dangerous world, we must club together, both to rebuild our economy and trade, and improve our defence against the shared threats from Russian aggression and America First. The biggest economic opportunity we have is on our doorstep. We need a new special relationship with the EU, because Britain's future lies with Europe – and one day back in the European Union."

REACTIONS:
- Dan Carden MP (Blue Labour leader): "There's nothing wrong with talking about rebuilding our relationship with Europe, but my party still looks at Brexit and thinks people were fooled by Farage. I don't think that... It would be far better to focus government resources on making the most of our sovereign freedoms in trade and defence and foreign policy. And start talking confidently about Britain's place in the world, and stop whining about Brexit."
- Jon Trickett MP (Normanton and Hemsworth): Labour "needs to honour the democratic decision"... "It feels a bit defeatist to me."
- Lord Glasman: "Labour needs to wake up and recognise that we're in a new era, and that national sovereignty is key to the restoration of our national pride. The EU is economically stagnant and will remain so."
