https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c3zxjdw5ywgpo
datePublished: ['2026-10-08T09:29:53.614Z'] -> ['10:29 BST 08 Oct']
dateModified: ['2026-10-08T16:29:33.598Z'] -> ['17:29 BST 08 Oct']

Asos hackers took more personal details than first revealed, BBC finds - BBC News BBC Homepage
Asos hackers took more personal details than first revealed, BBC finds
By Joe Tidy Cyber correspondent, BBC World Service
Asos has told its customers that hackers are in possession of detailed profiles of potentially millions of the online store's users.
It issued the update after BBC News told the retailer it had been contacted by cyber criminals who said this week's breach went beyond the "basic contact details" Asos previously said might have been accessed.
Names, addresses, phone numbers, emails, customer numbers and dates of birth are now in the hands of criminals.
One victim told the BBC it was "very unsettling" that the hackers now know these things about her.
The criminals also have access to the searches customers have made on the website. Terms like "reclaimed vintage", "glamorous wide fit" and "Asos petite" are visible in the data.
Harriet has been using Asos since 2019 - another detail the hackers now know.
"What I find particularly worrying is the possibility that stolen data can be used as a tool for for future attacks, meaning the impact of a breach could extend well beyond the initial incident," she said.
With the stolen information, scammers may be able to create convincing phishing attack emails or phone calls.
The risk to individuals is now higher and customers are being warned about potential impersonation scams.
In its email to customers, Asos confirmed data profiles were taken but said no bank details or passwords were accessed.
"Please remain cautious of unexpected messages or calls claiming to be from Asos," it said.
"We will never ask you to share passwords, security codes or payment details through an unsolicited message or call."
The company did not respond to questions about the scale of the breach.
Image caption, Customers saw this pop up notification on Tuesday
The high profile hack made global headlines on Tuesday when cyber criminals used Asos's own app system to send a pop up notification to potentially millions of people.
Later that day the firm confirmed to shareholders via the London Stock Exchange that the pop up was sent by an "unauthorised third party" and "basic personal information including name and contact details may have been accessed."
The company then sent an email to customers with similar wording.
On Wednesday evening the cyber criminals responsible contacted the BBC sharing a sample of the stolen data which showed the true extent of the hack.
The BBC held off publishing this article to allow Asos to contact its customers first.
Asos said it is still investigating the data breach and it would "contact customers directly where we believe additional information, support or action may be required".
The UK fashion site explained to customers that hackers gained access to an Asos employee account by "impersonating a trusted contact to obtain log in credentials".
With that log in to an unnamed service, the hackers were able to download the customer data.
In the pop up notification send to customers by the hackers, they claimed they had "compromised the Snowflake instance".
Snowflake is a popular data storage and analysis company whose customers have been breached in the past due to unauthorised log ins.
The cyber criminals, calling themselves Xuanyewen, claimed to the BBC they used a platform which is built natively on top of Snowflake - called Simon AI - to gain access to the data.
Simon AI has been contacted for comment. Snowflake previously said its platform had not been breached.
Asos said customers are not being asked to take any action.
But cyber security experts have warned users to change passwords as a precaution and be on alert for suspicious activity.
"Passwords have not been stolen, so be highly suspicious of any unsolicited text or email asking you to change or share yours," said Trevor Dearing, Senior Director of Critical Infrastructure at Illumio.
"Expect scammers to mention the attack, use your personal details to seem genuine, and create urgency, such as threatening to lock your account within 24 hours."
Asos said its website and app are safe to use and "we know our customers trust us with their information".
"We take that responsibility seriously and have already taken additional steps to further strengthen security controls," it said.
Asos confirms hackers sent 'unauthorised' notification to app users
What can I do to protect myself after 'Asos hacked' message?
Sign up for our Tech Decoded newsletter to follow the world's top tech stories and trends. Outside the UK? Sign up here .
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:39 Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder. 00:00:39, play video Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder
1:15 Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life. 00:01:15, play video Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life
1:19 Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world. 00:01:19, play video Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world
0:59 Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies. 00:00:59, play video Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies
1:50 Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming. 00:01:50, play video Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming
1:36 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal' 00:01:36, play video 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal'
1:29 The extreme motorsport where women keep winning. 00:01:29, play video The extreme motorsport where women keep winning
1:21 How this influencer got millions of views without existing. 00:01:21, play video How this influencer got millions of views without existing
0:50 Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5. 00:00:50, play video Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5
1:01 What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection? 00:01:01, play video What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection?
1:24 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change' 00:01:24, play video 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change'
1:20 What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried? 00:01:20, play video What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried?
1:00 This game will take 500 hours to complete. 00:01:00, play video This game will take 500 hours to complete
1:27 Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts. 00:01:27, play video Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts
1:19 France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand. 00:01:19, play video France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand
1:08 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped' 00:01:08, play video 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped'
1:05 Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment. 00:01:05, play video Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment
0:41 What time the Sun will start setting where you are. 00:00:41, play video What time the Sun will start setting where you are
Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
My magical daughter went to school and never came home - I want everyone to remember her
'You're made to feel like a criminal' - cancer survivor screamed at for stoma at airport
We spent thousands on a Tui river cruise but ended up on coach trips
Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
She made India fall in love with women's cricket - now her era as captain is over
How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear. Video How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear
Two icons, a glorious farewell and a potentially bitter ending
Stephen King's Carrie returns to explore the horrors of social media
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1 Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
2 Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
3 Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
4 Death prompts call for allergy management ratings
5 Forty five Scottish police officers suspended over alleged crimes against women
6 Actor Simon Pegg reveals ADHD diagnosis: 'It's just who I am'
7 Royal Navy sailor in court accused of preparing to spy for Russia
8 'Ominous signs' of winter pressures as NHS waiting list grows
9 Asos hackers took more personal details than first revealed, BBC finds
10 Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
How close can nature get to making a human clone?
Watchlist Add Curious Cases to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Curious Cases has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Subscribe Add Sliced Bread to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Sliced Bread has been added to your My Sounds .
David Olusoga sheds new light on Britain's slave traders
Watchlist Add Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Doctor Prof Dame Parveen Kumar shares the soundtrack of her life
Subscribe Add Desert Island Discs to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Desert Island Discs has been added to your My Sounds .
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.