https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c6ly0vzew9e8o
datePublished: ['2026-10-08T15:00:56.861Z'] -> ['16:00 BST 08 Oct']
dateModified: ['2026-10-08T16:19:43.902Z'] -> ['17:19 BST 08 Oct']

Two men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base - BBC News BBC Homepage
Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
Image caption, A breach of a perimeter fence was identified at the base near Huntingdon
Two Latvian men have been arrested under the National Security Act after a fence was breached at an RAF base in Cambridgeshire.
The alert was raised when a Ministry of Defence Police (MDP) security patrol at RAF Molesworth identified an abandoned vehicle at about 22:00 BST on Wednesday.
After searches by the MDP and Cambridgeshire Constabulary, a small breach of a perimeter fence was identified a few hours later.
The two men, who the Met Police said lived in the UK and were aged 36 and 32, were arrested inside the base perimeter.
They were initially arrested on suspicion of trespass on a prohibited site and criminal damage and taken to a Cambridgeshire police station.
The pair have since been further arrested on suspicion of an offence under section 4 of the National Security Act 2023 , external – namely entering a prohibited place for a purpose prejudicial to the UK.
Counter-terror police are investigating, and they are not currently linking it to the high-profile incident at RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire, but are understood to be keeping an open mind.
Commander Helen Flanagan, head of Counter Terrorism Policing London, said: "We're very aware of the recent heightened interest and concern around military sites, but at this stage there is nothing to suggest this incident is connected to the events at RAF Fairford last week."
Image caption, RAF Molesworth is near Huntingdon and close to the border with Northamptonshire
Officers said they were carrying out two searches at addresses in the Peterborough area in connection with the investigation, which Flanagan said was in the "very early stages".
"A big part of this is looking at any potential motivation as to why the men were present at the site, but I must stress we are keeping an open mind at this stage," she said.
"As ever, I would ask the public to remain vigilant and if you see anything of concern, then to contact police."
The abandoned vehicle found near the perimeter of the base initially led to the partial closure of the A1M and several other roads in the Glatton area at about 13:00 BST on Thursday.
A cordon was put in place while it was examined by bomb squad officers but the roads were reopened shortly after as Cambridgeshire Police said "nothing of concern was identified".
RAF Molesworth is located west of Huntingdon, close to the border with Northamptonshire.
In 2024, the US Defence Intelligence Agency said it had broken ground on a $556m (£421m) facility at the site - which would serve as a hub for US military intelligence in Europe and Africa.
It is also home to a Nato intelligence hub.
Image caption, The base is home to a Nato intelligence hub
A Ministry of Defence spokesperson said: "We remain highly vigilant to potential threats against defence sites and work closely with the police and our allies to keep them secure.
"The protection of our bases is kept under constant review, with a multi-layered approach that includes physical barriers, patrols, surveillance, monitoring, and counter-drone capabilities."
A spokesperson for US European Command thanked UK agencies for their support, but added: "It is inappropriate to discuss matters of intelligence, and we will not discuss specific force protection measures.
"We will continue to assess the threat environment surrounding our installations and take appropriate actions to protect our people, our platforms, and the bases where our forces operate from."
Do you have a story suggestion for Cambridgeshire? Contact us below.
Follow Cambridgeshire news on BBC Sounds , Facebook , external , Instagram , external and X , external .
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:39 Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder. 00:00:39, play video Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder
1:15 Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life. 00:01:15, play video Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life
1:19 Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world. 00:01:19, play video Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world
0:59 Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies. 00:00:59, play video Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies
1:50 Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming. 00:01:50, play video Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming
1:36 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal' 00:01:36, play video 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal'
1:29 The extreme motorsport where women keep winning. 00:01:29, play video The extreme motorsport where women keep winning
1:21 How this influencer got millions of views without existing. 00:01:21, play video How this influencer got millions of views without existing
0:50 Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5. 00:00:50, play video Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5
1:01 What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection? 00:01:01, play video What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection?
1:24 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change' 00:01:24, play video 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change'
1:20 What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried? 00:01:20, play video What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried?
1:00 This game will take 500 hours to complete. 00:01:00, play video This game will take 500 hours to complete
1:27 Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts. 00:01:27, play video Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts
1:19 France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand. 00:01:19, play video France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand
1:08 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped' 00:01:08, play video 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped'
1:05 Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment. 00:01:05, play video Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment
0:41 What time the Sun will start setting where you are. 00:00:41, play video What time the Sun will start setting where you are
Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
My magical daughter went to school and never came home - I want everyone to remember her
'You're made to feel like a criminal' - cancer survivor screamed at for stoma at airport
We spent thousands on a Tui river cruise but ended up on coach trips
Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
She made India fall in love with women's cricket - now her era as captain is over
How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear. Video How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear
Two icons, a glorious farewell and a potentially bitter ending
Stephen King's Carrie returns to explore the horrors of social media
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1 Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
2 Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
3 Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
4 Death prompts call for allergy management ratings
5 Forty five Scottish police officers suspended over alleged crimes against women
6 Actor Simon Pegg reveals ADHD diagnosis: 'It's just who I am'
7 Royal Navy sailor in court accused of preparing to spy for Russia
8 'Ominous signs' of winter pressures as NHS waiting list grows
9 Asos hackers took more personal details than first revealed, BBC finds
10 Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
How close can nature get to making a human clone?
Watchlist Add Curious Cases to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Curious Cases has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Subscribe Add Sliced Bread to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Sliced Bread has been added to your My Sounds .
David Olusoga sheds new light on Britain's slave traders
Watchlist Add Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Doctor Prof Dame Parveen Kumar shares the soundtrack of her life
Subscribe Add Desert Island Discs to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Desert Island Discs has been added to your My Sounds .
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.