https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cr1exlvpzylvo
datePublished: ['2026-10-08T13:32:06.584Z'] -> ['14:32 BST 08 Oct']
dateModified: ['2026-10-08T16:33:29.990Z'] -> ['17:33 BST 08 Oct']

Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says - BBC News BBC Homepage
Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
Figure caption, Watch: Why the search warrant was deemed 'unlawful' and what happens next?
By Lucy Manning ,  Special correspondent ,  Aleks Phillips   and   Dominic Casciani ,  Home and legal correspondent
Thames Valley Police has accepted warrants it used to search Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor's homes at the time of his arrest in February were unlawful, the High Court was told.
Following Thursday's hearing, items seized in the raid continue to be held by the police, with a further hearing to take place in 2027 to decide whether the material can be used as evidence.
Meanwhile, the criminal investigation into Mountbatten-Windsor is continuing.
The former prince, who denies any wrongdoing, was arrested by police on 19 February on suspicion of misconduct in public office, after which he launched a legal challenge over the legality of the search warrants.
The force said it accepted that the "initial court's decision to issue warrants under the specific piece of legislation used was incorrect" before they searched the properties.
On Thursday at the High Court, Judge Mr Justice Hilliard said Mountbatten-Windsor and the police had agreed that the search warrants had been unlawful.
However, he added: "The fact that the search warrants were quashed does not bring the investigation to an end or mean that the whole of the investigation is unlawful."
Mountbatten-Windsor opposes the police's bid to retain the evidence, the judge said, and another hearing is expected in 2027.
Image caption, Mountbatten-Windsor remains under police investigation despite a ruling that the way search warrants were issued was unlawful
His lawyers have used a judicial review to challenge the actions of the force's chief constable and the Central Criminal Court in the build-up to his arrest.
His arrest arose after the US Department of Justice published documents which raised suspicions he had forwarded confidential information to the convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein when Mountbatten-Windsor was a UK trade envoy in 2010.
He has consistently denied any wrongdoing in relation to Epstein.
The court heard on Thursday that Thames Valley Police seized documents and electronic devices when they raided Mountbatten-Windsor's homes earlier this year.
Thames Valley Police's position was that they had applied for search warrants under section eight and nine of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 at a hearing at the Central Criminal Court the day before the search.
That court determined that only section eight search warrants were needed and they were granted on that basis - but subsequently, a legal challenge has established that the court should have issued them under the section nine.
The judge explained on Thursday why the police could keep hold of the former prince's items that had been seized.
He said: "There would be little point in handing property back if it could then simply be lawfully seized under some other provision."
A Thames Valley Police spokesperson said: "The agreement that led to the quashing of the warrants relates specifically to a decision made by the court regarding the legal basis for these and is not a judgement on our ongoing investigation.
"We ensured the court was presented with all the necessary information and paperwork to inform their decision, following the correct legal processes throughout.
"We accept the position that the initial court's decision to issue warrants under the specific piece of legislation used was incorrect and therefore these must be legally quashed.
"Legal proceedings are currently ongoing to decide how material seized during the searches will be managed and whether we can lawfully retain it in support of our ongoing investigation."
The force said its "investigation into alleged misconduct in public office by a man in his 60s from Norfolk remains ongoing, and we continue to pursue all reasonable lines of enquiry to effectively and fairly progress this investigation".
Legal wrangle continues over material seized from former prince
The next stage in this legal dispute will be a behind-closed-doors hearing over whether the police can still retain material seized from Mountbatten-Windsor's homes under alternative powers designed for situations like this.
The error that has led to Thames Valley Police accepting the search warrants were unlawful relates to the particular power the judge permitted the force to use when its officers raided the properties.
Strict legal safeguards on searches bar the police from automatically seizing sensitive material without thinking through in advance the need to take it.
Examples of that material include advice from a suspect's lawyer or material which does not really belong to them, such as copies of confidential work-related papers from an employer.
In practice, if the police find such material during a search, they should return it rather than use it in their investigation.
The category of search warrant that was granted by the court in this instance did not take into account the possibility of such protected material being seized.
However, the law says police can in fact seize that kind of material - or potentially retain it in the event of an error - providing they pass some extra tests.
Thames Valley Police must now convince a judge that the material is likely to be of "substantial value" to their investigation into Mountbatten-Windsor and, ultimately, potential evidence to present to a court.
So while the force has conceded the search warrant was unlawful, a judge will have to decide whether this alternative search power, with its extra safeguards, justifies them keeping and using the material after all.
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:39 Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder. 00:00:39, play video Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder
1:15 Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life. 00:01:15, play video Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life
1:19 Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world. 00:01:19, play video Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world
0:59 Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies. 00:00:59, play video Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies
1:50 Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming. 00:01:50, play video Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming
1:36 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal' 00:01:36, play video 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal'
1:29 The extreme motorsport where women keep winning. 00:01:29, play video The extreme motorsport where women keep winning
1:21 How this influencer got millions of views without existing. 00:01:21, play video How this influencer got millions of views without existing
0:50 Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5. 00:00:50, play video Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5
1:01 What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection? 00:01:01, play video What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection?
1:24 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change' 00:01:24, play video 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change'
1:20 What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried? 00:01:20, play video What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried?
1:00 This game will take 500 hours to complete. 00:01:00, play video This game will take 500 hours to complete
1:27 Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts. 00:01:27, play video Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts
1:19 France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand. 00:01:19, play video France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand
1:08 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped' 00:01:08, play video 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped'
1:05 Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment. 00:01:05, play video Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment
0:41 What time the Sun will start setting where you are. 00:00:41, play video What time the Sun will start setting where you are
Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
My magical daughter went to school and never came home - I want everyone to remember her
'You're made to feel like a criminal' - cancer survivor screamed at for stoma at airport
We spent thousands on a Tui river cruise but ended up on coach trips
Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
She made India fall in love with women's cricket - now her era as captain is over
How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear. Video How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear
Two icons, a glorious farewell and a potentially bitter ending
Stephen King's Carrie returns to explore the horrors of social media
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1 Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
2 Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
3 Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
4 Death prompts call for allergy management ratings
5 Forty five Scottish police officers suspended over alleged crimes against women
6 Actor Simon Pegg reveals ADHD diagnosis: 'It's just who I am'
7 Royal Navy sailor in court accused of preparing to spy for Russia
8 'Ominous signs' of winter pressures as NHS waiting list grows
9 Asos hackers took more personal details than first revealed, BBC finds
10 Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
How close can nature get to making a human clone?
Watchlist Add Curious Cases to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Curious Cases has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Subscribe Add Sliced Bread to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Sliced Bread has been added to your My Sounds .
David Olusoga sheds new light on Britain's slave traders
Watchlist Add Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Doctor Prof Dame Parveen Kumar shares the soundtrack of her life
Subscribe Add Desert Island Discs to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Desert Island Discs has been added to your My Sounds .
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.