URL: https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/
datePublished: 2026-10-07T07:18:00-0400  -> ??2026-10-07T07:18:00-0400
dateModified: 2026-10-08T13:00:23-0400  -> ??2026-10-08T13:00:23-0400

What to know about the Iran war:
President Trump promised Thursday the U.S. would not attack Iran before the midterm elections, tempering rising crude oil prices. He also touted "productive conversations" with Iran, though he did not provide specifics.
The Houthis claimed Thursday to have hit Saudi Arabia's main airport with a ballistic missile, the third time this week the Iran-backed rebels have claimed an attack on the facility amid Yemen's escalating civil war.
New videos obtained exclusively by CBS News show Iranian attacks on a major U.S. military base in Kuwait as the war with Iran kicked off seven months ago. U.S. forces faced ballistic missiles, drones and what witnesses described as Iranian F-5 fighter jets.
New Updates
26m ago
Trump says U.S. won't attack Iran before midterms, touts oil coming through strait
President Trump has promised the U.S. would not attack Iran before the midterm elections, which take place on Nov. 3. He also touted "productive conversations" with Iran, though he did not provide specifics.
"I want to make it clear to everybody that, while Iran is in very bad condition, both Economically and Militarily, and while the Blockade will remain in full force and effect, with Oil flowing in Record Numbers of Barrels through the Hormuz Strait (22 Million Barrels, last night alone, with not one barrel coming from, or going to, Iran!), we will not be attacking Iran at any time prior to the Midterm Elections to be held in the United States on November 3rd," he wrote on Truth Social .
Several outlets reported on Thursday that Mr. Trump was considering new strikes on Iran before the midterms.
The Trump administration has consistently provided numbers for the millions of barrels being escorted out of the Strait of Hormuz under U.S. military protection. Moving out 22 million barrels of oil in one night would mark a total similar to prewar levels.
Brent crude, the international standard, was up to $105 a barrel, about a 4% increase from close Wednesday, before Mr. Trump's post on social media. After the post, it dropped to $103 a barrel.
By
Mark Osborne
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/#post-update-01b94254
link copied
12:03 PM
Saudi kindergarten hit by interception debris
The Saudi civil defence agency said in a post on X that a kindergarten and a medical complex in Riyadh were damaged by debris from a missile interception on Thursday, after Yemen's Iran-backed Houthis said they had targeted the capital's airport.
Saudi Arabia leads a pro-government coalition fighting against the Houthis in Yemen's civil war, and the Iran-backed group has repeatedly targeted Riyadh since the conflict roared back to life, vowing to hit critical infrastructure and disrupt Saudi airspace.
The conflict in Yemen had lain dormant since 2022 but erupted again in July, and the scale and frequency of the attacks on the Saudi capital since then have been unprecedented in the eight months of wider war in the Middle East.
Riyadh's airport has been repeatedly targeted by the Houthis in recent days as the group ramps up its attacks on the kingdom, including its oil facilities and cities close to the Yemeni border.
On Thursday, the group warned workers to evacuate Saudi Arabia's oil facilities, having days before hit a major refinery south of the capital.
Around the same time, the Saudi-led coalition fighting the Houthis said it had intercepted two missiles fired towards Riyadh.
Shortly after, the kingdom's civil defence agency said "interception debris" had damaged a kindergarten and a medical complex in the city. It did not say if there were any casualties or provide details of the damage.
Admissions by Saudi authorities of civilian targets being hit are relatively rare, with officials issuing few statements on Houthi attacks in recent weeks.
CBS/AFP
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/#post-update-4c99165b
link copied
11:33 AM
Houthis tell employees at Saudi oil facilities to evacuate, say lives are at risk
The Houthis told employees at Saudi oil facilities to evacuate Thursday, saying their lives were at risk.
"The armed forces warn all employees, including experts, engineers and workers at all Saudi oil facilities, against being present in locations that represent targets for our forces, so as not to put their lives at risk," Houthi military spokesman Brig. Gen. Yahya Saree wrote in a post on X .
He also renewed previous warnings to aviation companies, passengers and workers, about operating in Saudi airspace, which the Houthis have said they now see as a theater of war.
By
Frank Andrews , Khaled Wassef
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/#post-update-696c5ea2
link copied
10:51 AM
Houthis claim another attack on Saudi capital's airport
Houthi military spokesman Brig. Gen. Yahya Saree said the group's forces targeted King Khalid International Airport in Riyadh with a ballistic missile, claiming the missile struck its target and caused damage and disruption to air traffic.
"Our armed forces, with the help of God, managed to target King Khalid Airport in Riyadh with a ballistic missile this afternoon, which successfully hit its target and caused damage and disruption to air traffic at the airport," he wrote in a post on X Thursday .
If true, it would be the fourth time the group has targeted the airport this week.
The Saudi-led coalition fighting with the Yemeni government said Thursday it had intercepted two ballistic missiles fired by the Iranian-backed Houthis towards Riyadh, the Saudi capital.
In a brief post on X , coalition spokesperson Maj. Gen. Turki Al-Maliki gave no further details.
By
Frank Andrews , Khaled Wassef
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/#post-update-9edfa3ee
link copied
10:19 AM
Iran reviewing U.S. reaction to peace proposal, to respond "within a few days"
Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi said negotiations with the United States are continuing through intermediaries Thursday, adding that Tehran is reviewing Washington's response to an Iranian proposal described as a "seven-day plan."
Speaking to the Students News Network, an official news agency, after attending a funeral ceremony in Tehran earlier today, Araghchi said: "The negotiating process is still continuing and, through intermediaries, messages are being exchanged."
He said Iran had presented its proposal and had subsequently heard the U.S. position in response.
"We presented our plan, which was the plan referred to as the seven-day plan. We heard the Americans' views in response. We are now reviewing them."
"I think we will respond within a few days," he added. "As I said, the negotiating process continues."
By
Khaled Wassef, Frank Andrews
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/#post-update-6cf36e34
link copied
6:06 AM
Trump weighing whether to strike Iran before midterm elections, The Atlantic reports
The White House has asked the Pentagon to prepare strike options for a possible resumption of attacks on Iran before November's U.S. midterm elections, according to The Atlantic .
Citing two administration officials, the magazine reported Wednesday that the magnitude and targets of the potential strikes were still under discussion, and that a wider operation could take place after the November 3 voting.
The Atlantic cited the officials as saying the preparations were a sign of how eager President Trump is to reduce gas prices and show progress in the conflict, as consumer prices weigh heavy on voters' minds ahead of the midterms.
The plan's proponents do not think the attacks will bring Iran to talks or see the Strait of Hormuz reopened, according to The Atlantic. The hope is that they might demonstrate U.S. strength leading into the vote, the report said.
"It would make the president look like he got a win and that gas prices would start going down," a Republican familiar with the deliberations told the magazine.
The price of Brent crude oil, the international benchmark, shot up more than 4% Thursday after the story was published.
Asked by CBS News for comment on the report, a White House official said: "The Commander-in-Chief has all options available at any time. The United States is in a very strong position with control of the Strait of Hormuz and the Iranian economy collapsing. Iran has been decimated, and things will go one of two ways; the easy way or the hard way. President Trump holds all the cards and will do whatever is best for the United States."
The U.S. hasn't announced strikes on Iran for weeks, and Mr. Trump has threatened repeatedly to renew the attacks after the midterms. Last week he told TIME magazine he might order new strikes after the midterms, and he told reporters separately that he believed the U.S. would win the war "right after the election," though he also said, "maybe before the election."
By
Frank Andrews
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/#post-update-a1fd300e
link copied
9:47 AM
Saudi-led coalition says two Houthi ballistic missiles fired at Riyadh intercepted
The Saudi-led coalition fighting with the Yemeni government said Thursday it had intercepted two ballistic missiles fired by the Iranian-backed Houthis towards Riyadh, the Saudi capital.
In a brief post on X , coalition spokesperson Maj. Gen. Turki Al-Maliki gave no further details.
The Houthis claimed Thursday, for the third time this week, to have struck the Saudi capital's main international airport with a ballistic missile.
Earlier this week the Iranian proxy force said it had launched a series of attacks on Saudi Arabia, which killed three people.
AFP journalists heard several explosions in Riyadh on Thursday.
Along with the claims of repeated attacks on Saudi airports in recent days, Houthi weapons have also targeted critical energy infrastructure and military sites elsewhere in the kingdom.
By
Frank Andrews
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/#post-update-5007b79c
link copied
9:04 AM
EU backs extension of U.N. peacekeepers' mandate in Lebanon
The European Union's foreign policy chief Kaja Kallas said Thursday that the bloc favors extending the mandate of United Nations peacekeepers in south Lebanon. Israeli troops have occupied a large portion of southern Lebanon for months, after invading as part of Israel's war with the Iran-backed group Hezbollah, which attacked Israel in the days after the Iran war started in late February.
On a visit to southern Lebanon, Kallas told French news agency AFP that EU member states "have been saying that there can't be any security vacuum in southern Lebanon, so everybody is worried about the UNIFIL mandate ending," using the acronym for the U.N.'s Lebanon peacekeeping mission.
She added that "it would be most welcomed if this mandate is extended, so that is the position of the member states."
Last year, the U.N. Security Council voted not to renew the UNIFIL mandate after 2026, and its multinational forces – who have been in place since 1978 – are due to complete a draw-down in 2027.
Fighting in southern Lebanon has continued despite a three-way agreement signed in June by Lebanon, Israel and the U.S. on a framework that lays out provisions for the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon and Hezbollah's disarmament.
The Iranian-backed group has rejected the agreement, and progress on all aspects has largely stalled in recent months.
CBS/AFP
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/#post-update-5c506f95
link copied
8:25 AM
Dubai repatriation flights nixed after UAE pulls landing permit for Israeli carriers
Repatriation flights operated by Israeli airlines Arkia, Israir and El Al that had been due to bring Israeli nationals back from Dubai to Tel Aviv after the FlyDubai co-pilot's alleged attack on a flight captain last week have been canceled a day before they were set to fly.
The flights were canceled after the carriers' permission to land in the United Arab Emirates was revoked on Wednesday, according to the Times Of Israel .
"Arkia has engaged with all relevant parties to regain authorization and operate the flights," the airline said in a statement. "Unfortunately, these efforts have so far been unsuccessful, and we are therefore forced to cancel the flights."
Israel had expected the repatriation flights to be completed by Thursday, according to the outlet.
Last week, an attempted attack by the co-pilot of FlyDubai flight 1073 as it approached Israel resulted in the carrier suspending all flights to Tel Aviv. That left an estimated 10,000 Israelis stranded in Dubai and other destinations with return journeys scheduled via the UAE, according to the Times Of Israel, though about 7,400 had managed to fly home from Dubai before the flight cancellations this week.
Passengers on the flight involved in the incident last week were repatriated the same day from Saudi Arabia , where the plane made a safe emergency landing.
By
Frank Andrews , Khaled Wassef
https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/#post-update-269a49ae
link copied
7:44 AM
Diplomats and students in Saudi capital take shelter, residents and diplomats tell AFP
Diplomats were instructed to shelter in place in their respective embassies in the Saudi capital Riyadh Thursday, diplomats told the French news agency AFP, as residents said international schools were also taking precautions, with at least one facility sending children into a basement for safety.
The measures came after repeated blasts were heard in the city, in one of the loudest disturbances since the beginning of the Iran war.
Two people working in Riyadh's business hub – the King Abdullah Financia
