https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cxnv03e9nmp4o
datePublished: ['2026-10-08T12:42:56.330Z'] -> ['13:42 BST 08 Oct']
dateModified: ['2026-10-08T12:42:56.330Z'] -> ['13:42 BST 08 Oct']

'Ominous signs' of winter pressures as NHS waiting list grows - BBC News BBC Homepage
'Ominous signs' of winter pressures as NHS waiting list grows
Image caption, The NHS in England experienced its busiest September on record
There are "ominous signs" that winter pressures are already affecting the NHS in England, according to senior health leaders.
The warning comes as new data reveals the waiting list for routine hospital treatment in England rose for the second month in a row.
An estimated 7.37 million treatments were waiting to be carried out at the end of August, relating to 6.24 million patients.
The numbers are the highest since October 2025 and have raised questions over whether the NHS will meet a government target of treating 92% of patients within 18 weeks by 2029.
The rise in waiting lists comes despite the NHS in England delivering what were described as record levels of planned, elective care over the summer, while demand for services also reached its highest level ever.
A record 4.7 million planned treatments, procedures and appointments occurred across June, July and August – more than in any previous summer.
But both A&Es and ambulance services also saw a record number of patients for the month of September.
NHS England's national medical director, Professor Frankie Swords, warned that despite the progress delivered by frontline teams, winter pressure was already building.
"Staff are already seeing the ominous early signs of pressure, with more patients coming to A&E with flu and other respiratory viruses than usual for this time of year, and unfortunately many people are still waiting longer than we would like them to," she said.
The NHS Alliance, which represents hospitals, says the government in England is not going to achieve its manifesto promise of hitting the 18-week hospital waiting time target by the end of the parliament in 2029.
That 18-week target hasn't been hit for a decade.
A separate analysis by the Health Foundation think-tank said progress on cutting waiting times had stalled over the past year, with referrals on to the waiting list rising at a much quicker rate than the number of patients being treated.
Sir Ciarán Devane, the chief executive of the NHS Alliance which represents NHS trusts, said: "The NHS continues to respond to record demand for care, but the relentless growth in demand for services is putting NHS staff under real pressure."
Francesca Cavallaro, of the Health Foundation, said: "Thanks to the hard work of staff, the NHS has made progress in bringing down waiting times, but a rise in referrals mean that the service is having to run faster just to stand still and the prospects of meeting the government's pledge are receding.
"Andy Burnham's government have yet to set out whether they will give the 18-week target the same priority as it had under Keir Starmer, but our analysis shows the pledge is becoming increasingly hard to deliver."
"Not just numbers, but vulnerable people"
There will be concern too that the pressures of a long, hot summer have merged almost seamlessly into the pressures associated with the winter months.
More patients, including children, have been arriving at A&E departments with flu and other respiratory viruses.
The number of patients seen within four hours in A&Es last month fell to 74.4%, down from 75.0% in August.
The number of people waiting more than 12 hours in A&E departments from a decision to admit to actually being admitted – what is known as "corridor care" – stood at 50,582 in September, up from 44,951 in August.
That has alarmed Dr Vicky Price, president of the Society for Acute Medicine.
"A 13% year-on-year rise in 12-hour emergency department waits as winter approaches should set alarm bells ringing.
"More than 50,000 patients waited over 12 hours from the decision to admit to admission in September - 1,686 people every day.
"They represent vulnerable people who are waiting far too long for a bed and staff trying to deliver safe care in overcrowded emergency departments."
The government says the 18-week mark could still be achieved, saying it was investing in NHS buildings and equipment to make services more productive.
It also pointed to disruption to care that was caused by the strikes by resident doctors, a dispute which has now been settled.
But the strain that services are feeling in September, before winter has even really got going, will be a cause for concern among NHS leaders and their political bosses alike.
Have you been on an NHS waiting list for a long time? Share your experience
Rise in people waiting for NHS treatment for fourth month in a row
Fears of two-tier health system as more turn to private care, says watchdog
I'm on six different NHS waiting lists - it's taking over my life
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:39 Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder. 00:00:39, play video Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder
1:15 Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life. 00:01:15, play video Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life
1:19 Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world. 00:01:19, play video Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world
0:59 Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies. 00:00:59, play video Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies
1:50 Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming. 00:01:50, play video Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming
1:36 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal' 00:01:36, play video 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal'
1:29 The extreme motorsport where women keep winning. 00:01:29, play video The extreme motorsport where women keep winning
1:21 How this influencer got millions of views without existing. 00:01:21, play video How this influencer got millions of views without existing
0:50 Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5. 00:00:50, play video Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5
1:01 What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection? 00:01:01, play video What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection?
1:24 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change' 00:01:24, play video 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change'
1:20 What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried? 00:01:20, play video What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried?
1:00 This game will take 500 hours to complete. 00:01:00, play video This game will take 500 hours to complete
1:27 Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts. 00:01:27, play video Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts
1:19 France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand. 00:01:19, play video France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand
1:08 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped' 00:01:08, play video 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped'
1:05 Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment. 00:01:05, play video Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment
0:41 What time the Sun will start setting where you are. 00:00:41, play video What time the Sun will start setting where you are
Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
My magical daughter went to school and never came home - I want everyone to remember her
'You're made to feel like a criminal' - cancer survivor screamed at for stoma at airport
We spent thousands on a Tui river cruise but ended up on coach trips
Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
She made India fall in love with women's cricket - now her era as captain is over
How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear. Video How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear
Two icons, a glorious farewell and a potentially bitter ending
Stephen King's Carrie returns to explore the horrors of social media
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1 Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
2 Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
3 Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
4 Death prompts call for allergy management ratings
5 Forty five Scottish police officers suspended over alleged crimes against women
6 Actor Simon Pegg reveals ADHD diagnosis: 'It's just who I am'
7 Royal Navy sailor in court accused of preparing to spy for Russia
8 'Ominous signs' of winter pressures as NHS waiting list grows
9 Asos hackers took more personal details than first revealed, BBC finds
10 Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
How close can nature get to making a human clone?
Watchlist Add Curious Cases to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Curious Cases has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Subscribe Add Sliced Bread to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Sliced Bread has been added to your My Sounds .
David Olusoga sheds new light on Britain's slave traders
Watchlist Add Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Doctor Prof Dame Parveen Kumar shares the soundtrack of her life
Subscribe Add Desert Island Discs to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Desert Island Discs has been added to your My Sounds .
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.