https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c674p508lk78o
datePublished: ['2026-10-08T13:31:40.379Z'] -> ['14:31 BST 08 Oct']
dateModified: ['2026-10-08T16:07:54.519Z'] -> ['17:07 BST 08 Oct']

Girl's death prompts call for allergy management ratings - BBC News BBC Homepage
Death prompts call for allergy management ratings
Image caption, Mia St Hilaire died after drinking a milkshake in August 2023
The family of a 12-year-old girl who died after drinking a milkshake made in an unwashed blender at a cafe have called for a dedicated rating that scores food businesses on their allergy management.
Mia St Hilaire, who had a tree nut allergy, suffered an anaphylactic shock and died after she drank a Twix milkshake at the Pop Inn Cafe in Bermondsey, south-east London, in August 2023.
Her order contained hazelnut residue because the blender had not been washed after a Kinder Bueno milkshake was made in it beforehand, an inquest concluded on Thursday.
In a statement, her family said "significant changes" were needed to protect people with food allergies.
In January 2025, the cafe was fined £18,000 and its proprietor Baris Yucel was given 100 hours of community service after admitting six criminal charges related to the Food Safety Act.
These included not making allergen advice available or visible to consumers, failing to manage allergen contamination during the food production process, and serving food that contained an allergenic ingredient that was not supposed to be present.
CCTV evidence showed that Yucel had not cleaned the blender before preparing Mia's milkshake.
Image caption, Mia's parents said their "deeply loved" daughter would never be forgotten
Assistant coroner Briony Ballard listened to evidence at London Inner South Coroner's Court before publishing a narrative conclusion on Mia's death.
In a statement read after the conclusion of the inquest, Mia's parents Adrian St Hilaire and Chanel Spence said families with food allergies should not be "at risk" when eating out.
"We hope that lessons will be learned from Mia's death and that changes will be made to prevent other families enduring the devastation that we now have to live with," they said.
"Consumers rely on food hygiene ratings when deciding where it is safe to eat, but they do not tell us anything about the way a food business runs allergy management systems.
"There should be a separate, clearly displayed rating dedicated to the allergy management, like the food hygiene rating.
"This would mean that people with allergies could make more informed choices about where they eat."
Natasha's Foundation founder Tanya Ednan-Laperouse, whose daughter died aged 15 from an allergy to sesame in a Pret A Manger baguette, said allergies were "a serious, unpredictable medical condition".
"The inquest into Mia's death illustrates just how far we still have to go to improve awareness, understanding and regulation of food allergies," she said.
"Natasha's Foundation is working hard with business, schools, communities and the government to increase awareness and understanding of food allergies to try to prevent other families from having to go through the terrible loss that Mia's family endure."
Rebecca Sudworth, director of food policy at the Food Standards Agency, said her "deepest sympathies" were with Mia's family.
"Food businesses must take allergen risks seriously, every time," she said. "People have the right to know exactly what is in their food and drink, and it is a business's legal duty to provide accurate allergen information.
"We recently produced new guidance for businesses to make sure they understand their responsibilities to inform consumers about allergens, including the risk of cross-contact, and we are keeping this policy under review. We also have free allergy training and practical tools that businesses can use."
Listen to the best of BBC Radio London on Sounds and follow BBC London on Facebook , external , X , external and Instagram , external . Send your story ideas to hello.bbclondon@bbc.co.uk , external
Girl, 12, died after drink made in unwashed blender
Oxford Street pedestrianisation: All the bus route changes
Young woman, 20, dies after car struck lamppost outside Dagenham Asda
New London Overground line plans spark debate over missed opportunity for Twickenham
Tesco stars but oil price gains keep stocks lower
Five A2 closures planned in Kent this weekend with overnight disruption warned
Ruxley Manor Christmas launch sells out as festive displays prepare to open
Information about BBC links to other news sites
Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
My magical daughter went to school and never came home - I want everyone to remember her
'You're made to feel like a criminal' - cancer survivor screamed at for stoma at airport
We spent thousands on a Tui river cruise but ended up on coach trips
Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
She made India fall in love with women's cricket - now her era as captain is over
How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear. Video How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear
Two icons, a glorious farewell and a potentially bitter ending
Stephen King's Carrie returns to explore the horrors of social media
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1 Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
2 Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
3 Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
4 Death prompts call for allergy management ratings
5 Forty five Scottish police officers suspended over alleged crimes against women
6 Actor Simon Pegg reveals ADHD diagnosis: 'It's just who I am'
7 Royal Navy sailor in court accused of preparing to spy for Russia
8 'Ominous signs' of winter pressures as NHS waiting list grows
9 Asos hackers took more personal details than first revealed, BBC finds
10 Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
How close can nature get to making a human clone?
Watchlist Add Curious Cases to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Curious Cases has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Subscribe Add Sliced Bread to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Sliced Bread has been added to your My Sounds .
David Olusoga sheds new light on Britain's slave traders
Watchlist Add Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Doctor Prof Dame Parveen Kumar shares the soundtrack of her life
Subscribe Add Desert Island Discs to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Desert Island Discs has been added to your My Sounds .
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.