https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cm0ldg95j034o
datePublished: ['2026-10-08T15:01:15.675Z'] -> ['16:01 BST 08 Oct']
dateModified: ['2026-10-08T15:01:15.675Z'] -> ['16:01 BST 08 Oct']

Birmingham Airport unveils £2bn plan for 30 million passengers - BBC News BBC Homepage
Birmingham Airport announces £2bn expansion
Image caption, Airport chiefs said plans would create more than 50,000 jobs, including 3,800 on site
Birmingham Airport has announced a £2bn expansion plan which bosses say could more than double passenger numbers and create thousands of jobs.
The draft plan, a spokesperson said, sets out the use of existing runway capacity alongside "significantly enhanced" passenger facilities over the next 15 years.
Unveiling an eight-week public consultation, chief executive Nick Barton said the scheme aims to ensure the airport was "ready for the future" but needed a "fair and stable taxation environment".
Transport secretary Heidi Alexander said the government was "backing our aviation sector to continue growing, right across the country".
In 2025, the airport said it had seen a record year with more than 13 million passengers travelling through it. Bosses want to see this rise by more than double, up to 30 million a year.
Airport chiefs said the proposals set out a "clear commitment" to continue serving the region and create more than 50,000 jobs, including 3,800 at the airport site.
They added that they wanted to make sure the growth was "delivered responsibly and sustainably" for the people living closes to the site.
The first stage of development could start in 2027, with significant investments in areas such as baggage and terminal facilities, additional aircraft stands and improvements in surface access.
Hundreds of passengers were affected by issues with the airport's baggage system in August , with many left without their luggage.
People can give feedback on the plans online, by post or attend any of the 20 events, which start in Hampton on Arden on 16 October , external .
Image caption, West Midlands mayor Rickard Park said the consultation gave local people and businesses the chance to shape the airport's expansion
"The £2bn proposed investment is unprecedented at Birmingham Airport and will take our airport close to 30 million passengers," said Barton.
"This level of ambition sends a strong signal of support and confidence in our airport and wider region.
However, Barton added that the plan came at a time the airport was faced with increased running costs from wage bills, energy prices and taxation.
"Unless tax and regulatory environments are made more favourable and stable for major infrastructure investment, they [the plans] may not materialise," he said.
Alexander said the city's plan was a "massive boost" to the West Midlands, unlocking investment and "creating 50,000 well-paid local jobs to get people into employment".
Richard Parker, the Labour mayor of the West Midlands, also welcomed the "ambitious masterplan" which he said would improve international links and unlock vital backing for local businesses and supply chains.
"This consultation gives local people and business owners a chance to have their say and help shape the airport's expansion so that it brings lasting benefits for our communities," he said.
Tell us which stories we should cover in Birmingham and the Black Country
Follow BBC Birmingham on BBC Sounds , Facebook , external , X , external and Instagram , external .
Airlines criticise air traffic control as second glitch causes more disruption
Airport baggage issues leave hundreds without luggage
Direct Birmingham-to-Manchester Airport trains due
'Chaos' as passengers face airport security queues
'Strange' M6 police incident prompts man's arrest
Sisters pulled from sea off Brighton visited site of mum's death in Birmingham before taking lives - inquest
Six actors that link Bridgerton franchise to the West Midlands as new spin-off announced
Brierley Hill footpath to close for two weeks for gas main replacement
A38 Queensway tunnel closed live after collision prompts major delays
Police searching for driver who fled scene of serious collision
Information about BBC links to other news sites
Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC
0:39 Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder. 00:00:39, play video Moment student arrested for Dexter-style 'kill room' murder
1:15 Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life. 00:01:15, play video Cyclist reunites with teenager that saved his life
1:19 Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world. 00:01:19, play video Man back in UK after 28-year journey around the world
0:59 Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies. 00:00:59, play video Evicted 87-year-old, who triggered Spanish protests, dies
1:50 Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming. 00:01:50, play video Men jailed for raping girl after Snapchat grooming
1:36 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal' 00:01:36, play video 'I had to crawl through a busy train like an animal'
1:29 The extreme motorsport where women keep winning. 00:01:29, play video The extreme motorsport where women keep winning
1:21 How this influencer got millions of views without existing. 00:01:21, play video How this influencer got millions of views without existing
0:50 Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5. 00:00:50, play video Why Gears of War: E-Day won't come to PS5
1:01 What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection? 00:01:01, play video What next for Christa Pike after failed lethal injection?
1:24 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change' 00:01:24, play video 'I was blamed for my baby's death. Now NHS needs to change'
1:20 What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried? 00:01:20, play video What is pneumonic plague and should I be worried?
1:00 This game will take 500 hours to complete. 00:01:00, play video This game will take 500 hours to complete
1:27 Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts. 00:01:27, play video Workers paid under £1 an hour to make football shirts
1:19 France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand. 00:01:19, play video France suspends police use of stun grenades after boy loses hand
1:08 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped' 00:01:08, play video 'My father abused me in the countryside. I felt trapped'
1:05 Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment. 00:01:05, play video Man sentenced to death over Facebook comment
0:41 What time the Sun will start setting where you are. 00:00:41, play video What time the Sun will start setting where you are
Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
My magical daughter went to school and never came home - I want everyone to remember her
'You're made to feel like a criminal' - cancer survivor screamed at for stoma at airport
We spent thousands on a Tui river cruise but ended up on coach trips
Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
She made India fall in love with women's cricket - now her era as captain is over
How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear. Video How toxic haze is causing Singapore’s landmarks to disappear
Two icons, a glorious farewell and a potentially bitter ending
Stephen King's Carrie returns to explore the horrors of social media
US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter
1 Three sisters who drowned in sea off Brighton took own lives, inquest finds
2 Warrants used to search Andrew's homes were unlawful, court says
3 Two Latvian men arrested on suspicion of trespass at RAF base
4 Death prompts call for allergy management ratings
5 Forty five Scottish police officers suspended over alleged crimes against women
6 Actor Simon Pegg reveals ADHD diagnosis: 'It's just who I am'
7 Royal Navy sailor in court accused of preparing to spy for Russia
8 'Ominous signs' of winter pressures as NHS waiting list grows
9 Asos hackers took more personal details than first revealed, BBC finds
10 Could Christa Pike face execution again and by what method?
How close can nature get to making a human clone?
Watchlist Add Curious Cases to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Curious Cases has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Subscribe Add Sliced Bread to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Sliced Bread has been added to your My Sounds .
David Olusoga sheds new light on Britain's slave traders
Watchlist Add Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga to your Watchlist in iPlayer Watchlist Adding Watchlist Remove Removing
Finding Britain’s Slave Traders with David Olusoga has been added to your iPlayer Watchlist .
Doctor Prof Dame Parveen Kumar shares the soundtrack of her life
Subscribe Add Desert Island Discs to My Sounds Subscribe Subscribing Subscribed Unsubscribe Removing
Desert Island Discs has been added to your My Sounds .
Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.