URL: https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/iran-war-nuclear-donald-trump-vance-rubio-strait-of-hormuz/
CBS News Iran war live blog. NOTE: page datePublished 2026-10-07T07:18-0400 (12:18 BST Wed, PRE-WINDOW); dateModified 2026-10-08T02:32-0400 (07:32 BST). Individual entry times below are entry datePublished converted to BST.

===== France summons Iran ambassador
The French foreign ministry on Wednesday summoned the Iranian ambassador to protest against a "disinformation campaign conducted by the Iranian authorities" over high school protests that have rocked France.
The ambassador was told "the misleading content disseminated online" by official accounts of the Iranian foreign ministry was "absolutely unacceptable," the ministry said in a statement, after Tehran on Tuesday summoned the French ambassador over the treatment of protesters in France.
Iran accused France of "violent treatment" of the protesters and "extensive and flagrant human rights violations" during the demonstrations, which intensified last week and have seen clashes between demonstrators and the security forces.
But the French foreign ministry said the summoning of its ambassador to Tehran was "baseless."
Iran's anger over events in France came after Iranian security forces used deadly force earlier this year to crack down on anti-government protests that peaked on Jan. 8-9.

===== Trump: War will end
President Trump said the war will end "very soon" during an Oval Office press availability on Wednesday, a claim he has been making for months.
Mr. Trump also said oil prices will "drop like a rock" once the conflict is over. The cost of Brent crude, the international standard, has hovered around $99 on Wednesday. The cost fell below $100 after spiking as high as $108 in mid-September.
"As soon as we're finished with the war, which will be very soon, it's going to be very soon," the president said. "One way or the other, we'll be finished with it, but oil will come down to levels that were, I think, maybe even lower than they were before the war started."
Mr. Trump has been saying the war will be over "very soon" since at least March 9 at a press conference from his Doral country club near Miami.
The French foreign ministry on Wednesday summoned the Iranian ambassador to protest against a "disinformation campaign conducted by the Iranian authorities" over high school protests that have rocked France.

===== Tanker in Persian Gulf
A tanker sailing off the north coast of Qatar reported being struck "by multiple projectiles," causing an unspecified number of casualties, the United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations said on Wednesday.
The incident took place 59 miles off the coast of Madinat ash Shamal, a coastal city in the Persian Gulf, the British maritime agency said, adding that authorities were investigating. It did not specify the ship's origin.
"Vessels are advised to transit with caution and report any suspicious activity to UKMTO," the agency's statement said.
Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth delivered remarks on Wednesday from the USS Abraham Lincoln off the coast of San Diego as the sailors were presented with the Presidential Unit Citation for extraordinary heroism and thanked them for the long deployment.
The carrier and its escort ships were set to return to home port Thursday after a record 321-day deployment in the Middle East.

===== Agency ready to release more oil
The International Energy Agency's member countries stand ready to release additional oil from their strategic reserves if necessary and will prioritize diesel due to tight supplies of the fuel, the head of the group said Wednesday.
IEA member states still have ample reserves of crude oil and refined products and stand "ready to release more of these stocks to the market if and when required," its director, Fatih Birol, said in a statement.
G7 countries, in coordination with the IEA, agreed last Friday to immediately release 100 million barrels of diesel and crude oil to ease global energy supply concerns caused by fallout from the U.S.-Iran war.
While shipments of crude through the Strait of Hormuz have recently picked up, damage to refineries in the region, along with those in Russia, has led to shortages of some refined products like diesel.
"IEA members also supported the prioritisation of the release of diesel stocks, to the extent possible, given the current tightness in diesel markets," Birol said in his statement.

===== New videos show Iran
New videos obtained exclusively by CBS News show Iranian attacks on a major U.S. military base in Kuwait as the war with Iran kicked off seven months ago. American forces faced ballistic missiles, drones and what witnesses described as Iranian F-5 fighter jets.
The footage obtained by CBS News was recorded by a person stationed on the ground at Camp Buehring, and captures the moments of impact and their explosive aftermath. Damage to buildings and military equipment can also be seen in the videos.
The attacks on Camp Buehring offer a window into the strain Iranian attacks placed on American forces during the opening days of the war. CBS News has learned that soldiers defending the base ran critically low on .50-caliber ammunition as some soldiers were repositioned into the Udari Desert in Kuwait. Two soldiers were injured by lightning there in late April, according to U.S. officials with knowledge of the matter.
Contacted by CBS News, U.S. Central Command, the primary unit which oversees American military operations across the Middle East, declined to comment.
A tanker sailing off the north coast of Qatar reported being struck "by multiple projectiles," causing an unspecified number of casualties, the United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations said on Wednesday.

===== Pete Hegseth applauds
Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth delivered remarks on Wednesday from the USS Abraham Lincoln off the coast of San Diego as the sailors were presented with the Presidential Unit Citation for extraordinary heroism and thanked them for the long deployment.
The carrier and its escort ships were set to return to home port Thursday after a record 321-day deployment in the Middle East.
The strike group executed 3,693 combat sorties, delivered 1.37 million pounds of ordnance, launched 450 Tomahawk land attack cruise missiles, shot down 77 one-way attack unmanned aerial systems, sank 64 Iranian warships, destroyed 21 anti-ship cruise missiles, and defended against four fast-attack craft and explosive-carrying dhows, according to Pentagon statistics.
Hegseth said some in the media tried to turn the Lincoln into a symbol of low morale, but after meeting with some of the sailors and leadership, he says it's the exact opposite. He acknowledged some hardships, but the crew of the Lincoln was resilient.
"What makes the U.S. military and the U.S. Navy and all these sailors different is that you adapt, and that you're resilient, and you overcome," he said. "You finish the mission nonetheless."

===== Iranian army threatens U.S. bases
Iran's army is better prepared than before to confront any renewed attack, according to spokesperson Brig. Gen. Mohammad Akrami-Nia, who told the semi-official Fars news agency that Tehran is prepared to launch preemptive strikes on U.S. positions if necessary.
"We have carried out this type of operation in the recent war," Akrami-Nia said, adding Iran's military doctrine had shifted from a defensive to an offensive one and that such operations were intended to "take the initiative away from them."
According to Akrami-Nia, the army has already targeted U.S. bases prepared for operations against Iran, including with drones. "Therefore, within the framework of preemptive warfare, we have carried out actions and operations," he said.
"Before they could take action, they were struck and came under attack," he continued.
"If necessary, in the future we will carry out preemptive operations to prevent the enemy from carrying out any aggression or attack," he added, saying Iran now has "large stockpiles" of weapons after continued production.

===== Putin to meet Iran
Russian President Vladimir Putin will meet Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian Friday in Turkmenistan, according to Iran's official news agency IRNA.
The pair held a phone call Wednesday, according to IRNA, in which Pezeshkian congratulated Putin on his birthday.
During the call, the two presidents also emphasized the continuation and strengthening of bilateral and strategic cooperation between Tehran and Moscow, according to the Iranian state news agency's readout.
Iran's defense ministry said Tuesday that cooperation with Russia, as well as China, had strengthened over the course of the seven-month war, crediting those ties, in part, for a purported boost in Iranian weapons and defense equipment production capacity.
Outgoing Iranian Oil Minister Mohsen Paknejad has rejected President Trump's account of his resignation, saying his departure had nothing to do with the claims the president made about Iran's economy and oil industry.

===== Syria poised to give Iraq
Syria looks set to provide an overland route for Iraqi crude oil to bypass the Strait of Hormuz, the head of Syrian Petroleum Co. has told Bloomberg.
"I expect the export of Iraqi crude via Syria by trucks to start as soon as possible as the deal between both governments is almost done," Yousef Qiblawy, chief executive officer of the state-owned Syrian Petroleum Co., said Wednesday. "So, hopefully, by mid-October the first chain of trucks with crude will come to Syria."
The Iraqi government requested Syria's help to increase crude exports, Qiblawy said.
Iraq already uses around 1,000 trucks daily to transport fuel oil overland to Syria's Mediterranean port city Baniyas, where it is loaded onto tankers for shipment further afield.
"I think there will be at least the same number of trucks with crude as with fuel oil, or even more than 1,000 trucks per day, because the quantity of Iraqi crude is much more than of fuel oil," Qiblawy said.
