URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c9zrd7k38k8lo
BBC 08 Oct 06:00

Funding to help more people access healthy food

Five local authorities in Hull and Lincolnshire will each receive £222,000 to help people overcome challenges accessing healthy food

A woman with short blonde hair and wearing a beige coloured jacket is standing in a supermarket and looking at shelves that contain fruit and vegetables.

People in Hull are facing a \"stark\" challenge when it comes to accessing healthy food, the leader of the city's council says.

The local authority and four from Lincolnshire are among 45 in England that will each receive £222,000 from the Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) to help improve access to healthy and affordable food.

The authorities were chosen after being identified as having the greatest levels of deprivation and childhood obesity.

Councillor Mike Ross, leader of Hull City Council, said: \"It can be incredibly difficult for some people to get the healthy food they need. So, anything that helps tackle those barriers is really important.\"

DEFRA said the Good Food Neighbourhoods funding could support schemes such as community food shops and mobile greengrocers, as well as helping local authorities strengthen their capacity to plan for and meet local food needs.

The National Child Measurement Programme for the school year 2024/25 shows 10.2% of children in reception year (aged 4-5) in Hull had a BMI status of obese, while in Year 6 (aged 10-11) that figure was 19%.

Those figures are above the national average.

Ross added: \"This whole picture demonstrates there is severe need here.

\"Of course, this funding will help tackle that, building on the work that's already taking place and wanting to work with not just the council but with local communities and groups across the city to make sure everything is done to support local residents.\"

Darren Squires, from the Hull Food Partnership, says there are a number of reasons why some people struggle to access healthy food

Darren Squires, from the Hull Food Partnership, which brings together all the community food organisations in the city, said it was not just a case of low income that made it difficult for people to access food.

He said: \"When we talk about deprivation, some of it is poverty, some of it is access to food if you're so far away from a supermarket and don't drive or if you're running two jobs.

\"For some people it's not about income. People can be financially secure, but still time poor.

\"There are areas in the city where it is much easier to get a takeaway meal than it is to get any other kind of food that you would cook at home.\"

Other local authorities from East Yorkshire and Lincolnshire allocated the funding include North East Lincolnshire Council (NELC), North Lincolnshire Council, City of Lincoln Council and South Holland District Council.

Councillor Nige Oliver, portfolio holder for health, wellbeing and adult social care at NELC, welcomed the announcement.

He said: \"Families in areas like ours can face significant challenges in trying to access affordable, healthy food.

\"We're now looking at how we can use this funding to support people in our area.\"

The BBC understands a government meeting next week will provide further details to local authorities about this funding.

Listen to highlights from Hull and East Yorkshire or Lincolnshire on BBC Sounds, watch the latest episode of Look North.

Download the BBC News app from the App Store for iPhone and iPad or Google Play for Android devices

Read more about strikes in the Black Sea.

Read more reporting from BBC Verify here.

Southampton boss Tonda Eckert is free to continue coaching at the club after receiving a six-week ban - suspended for two years - for his part in the Spygate scandal.

READ MORE: Eckert free to stay as Southampton boss as Spygate ban suspended

More stories from around Scotland.

More on Christa Pike's condition.

Read more on the Oct 7 anniversary.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

More on the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.