URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/drivers-set-to-save-as-petrol-prices-launch-on-google-maps
gov.uk DESNZ press release

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Navigation menu
      


      
                    Menu

        
          Menu
      
      
        


            
              
                Services and information
              
              
                    
                      Benefits
                      
                    
                    
                      Births, death, marriages and care
                      
                    
                    
                      Business and self-employed
                      
                    
                    
                      Childcare and parenting
                      
                    
                    
                      Citizenship and living in the UK
                      
                    
                    
                      Crime, justice and the law
                      
                    
                    
                      Disabled people
                      
                    
                    
                      Driving and transport
                      
                    
                    
                      Education and learning
                      
                    
                    
                      Employing people
                      
                    
                    
                      Environment and countryside
                      
                    
                    
                      Housing and local services
                      
                    
                    
                      Money and tax
                      
                    
                    
                      Passports, travel and living abroad
                      
                    
                    
                      Visas and immigration
                      
                    
                    
                      Working, jobs and pensions
                      
                    
              
            

            
              
                Government activity
              
              
                    
                      Departments
                      Departments, agencies and public bodies

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

Reports, analysis and official statistics

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

Drivers to save at the pump as near real-time petrol and diesel prices are included on Google Maps for the first time.

Drivers are set to save at the pump as near real-time petrol and diesel prices are included on Google Maps for the first time today (Thursday 8 October).

Checking local fuel prices is now as simple as opening Google Maps and searching for a forecourt nearby, with near real time prices for petrol and diesel displayed on the app – supporting millions of drivers to access the cheapest fuel in their local area.

At a time when the ongoing conflict in the Middle East has been pushing up fuel prices for drivers, comparing prices can save households who own a car around £40 a year.

This marks the latest step in the government’s work to tackle the affordability crisis, after the VAT cut to electricity bills and a £2 cap on bus fares, giving families some breathing space with the cost of living.

Minister for Energy Consumers Polly Billington said:

Tackling the affordability crisis is our first responsibility and for so many families and businesses, petrol and diesel are essential goods, not luxuries.

Accessing the cheapest fuel should be simple, which is why it is a gamechanger for near real-time fuel prices to be shown on Google Maps for the first time in the UK, helping drivers to find the best deal and save money at the pump.

Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Healey said:

Getting the best price at the pump is now easier. This doesn’t fix everything; bills have gone up because of events in the Middle East.

But we’re not powerless. And small changes like this, cutting tax on electricity bills and capping bus fares at £2 all help give families a bit of breathing space.

The Fuel Finder scheme was created to help drivers get more competitive fuel prices following a recommendation by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA).

Since February, it has been compulsory for petrol stations across the UK to report the price of their fuel within 30 minutes of it changing or risk a fine – and the CMA can take action where there is evidence that petrol stations are not complying with the law.

The overwhelming majority of petrol stations are inputting data to Fuel Finder promptly, with around 99% of all fuel sold on UK roads now reflected.

The data is already used by thousands of drivers across apps such as Waze, Petrol Prices, the AA, Confused.com and RAC Fuel Watch, and its integration with Google Maps will help millions more motorists find the best price at the pump.

Sarah-Jayne Williams, Director of Global Product Partnerships for Geo at Google, said:

Navigating fuel rising costs shouldn’t add stress to everyday journeys.

Integrating Fuel Finder data into Google Maps and Waze gives drivers visibility on nearby pump prices, helping drivers make intentional choices to help their budgets go further this winter.

The following links open in a new tab

Share on Facebook
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
        
          
            
                
                  
                
                      Share on X
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
    



          

          
                        



          
      

        
          
                      
  
      



      

    Explore the topic

  
        Climate change and energy
        Driving and road transport

  






          
        
    
    
  


      
          

  

  
    
      
        Is this page useful?
        
          
            
              Maybe
          
          
            
              Yes this page is useful
          
          

            
              No this page is not useful
          
        
      
    

    
      Thank you for your feedback
    

    
      
        Report a problem with this page
    
  


  

  
    
      

      

      Help us improve GOV.UK
      Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
        Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript).