URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cw4g1j2z5zvzo
TIME: BBC, RSS 04:02 BST today; execution 20:03 local Wed = 02:03 BST Thu
BBC 04:02 Texas first execution since Pike

Texas carries out first US execution since Christa Pike's botched lethal injections

A fence, barbed wire and a guard are visible at the Allan B. Polunsky Unit, the prison that houses the men on Texas' death row in Livingston, Texas

A death row inmate was executed by lethal injection on Wednesday evening in Texas, the first execution in the US since the failed attempt to put Christa Pike to death last week.

Lawyers for 46-year-old Jamaal Howard had asked a judge to pause the execution in light of Pike's botched injections last week, according to the BBC's US partner, CBS News.

But courts denied their requests, and he received a fatal dose of pentobarbital at the state prison in Huntsville. He was pronounced dead at 20:03 local time.

Howard was convicted and sentenced to death for the 2000 murder of a convenience store clerk during a robbery he committed.

His lawyers had argued that because Texas planned to inject Howard with the same drug - pentobarbital - that was used on Pike, he faced the same risks. They also alleged that Texas' supply of the drug had become degraded, as Pike's lawyers have similarly argued.

A court twice denied their appeals and the US Supreme Court also turned down the appeal late Wednesday.

\"Texas should not be eager to follow in Tennessee's footsteps; a stay would keep that from happening,\" Howard's attorneys had argued, CBS reported.

Howard's attorneys also asked Texas Governor Greg Abbott, a Republican, to delay the execution by 30 days so they could seek additional information about the drug used in the execution. The governor did not grant the delay.

Howard was 20 when he shot Vickie Swartout, 42, who was working at a convenience store in Texas. Howard stole a carton of cigarettes and $114 from the register.

Asked if he had a final statement before his execution, Howard apologized to Swartout's family, who watched from a witness room, US media report.

\"I wish that you accept my apology, and I wish for your forgiveness,\" Howard said. \"I'm sorry for what happened. I wish you can learn to forgive me one of these days.\"

Read more about strikes in the Black Sea.

Read more reporting from BBC Verify here.

Southampton boss Tonda Eckert is free to continue coaching at the club after receiving a six-week ban - suspended for two years - for his part in the Spygate scandal.

READ MORE: Eckert free to stay as Southampton boss as Spygate ban suspended

More stories from around Scotland.

More on Christa Pike's condition.

Read more on the Oct 7 anniversary.

Listen to CBeebies Parenting Download on BBC Sounds.

More on the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham.

Watch the full episode on BBC iPlayer.