URL: https://www.npr.org/2026/10/07/nx-s1-5992963/dyed-diesel-fuel-price-farmers-trucks
NPR 07 Oct 19:00

Accessibility links   
            Skip to main content
      Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
   


      
         


      
         



    
        
            
                
                    
                    Open Navigation Menu
                
            

            
                
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                    
                      
                        
                      
                      Newsletters
                    
                
            

            

            
                
                
                  
                
                NPR Shop
                
            

            
                
                
                  
                
                Get NPR+
                
            

            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                    Close Navigation Menu
                
            
            
                
                    
                      
                       
                      Home
                      
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          News
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for News
                        
                    

                    
                        National
                        World
                        Politics
                        Business
                        Elections
                        Health
                        Science
                        Climate
                        Race
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Culture
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Culture
                        
                    

                    
                        Books
                        Movies
                        Television
                        Pop Culture
                        Food
                        Art & Design 
                        Performing Arts
                        Life Kit
                        Gaming
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Music
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Music
                        
                    

                    
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    


                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Podcasts & Shows
                        
                        
                          
                          
                          Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    

                    
                        Daily
                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Morning Edition
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Saturday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Weekend Edition Sunday
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    All Things Considered
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Up First
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Here & Now
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
                                    NPR Politics Podcast
                                
                            
                        
                        Featured

                        
    
        
        Wait Wait...Don't Tell Me!
    

    
        
        Fresh Air
    

    
        
        Wild Card with Rachel Martin
    

    
        
        It's Been a Minute
    

    
        
        Embedded
    


                        
                            
                                
                                    
                                    Get NPR+
                                
                            

                            More Podcasts & Shows
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Search
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          Newsletters
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                          
                          NPR Shop
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                        
                        Get NPR+
                        
                    
                
                
            
        
    
    
        
            
                
                    
                      
                    
                

                
    
        Tiny Desk
    

    
        New Music Friday
    

    
        All Songs Considered
    

    
        Music Features
    

    
        Live Sessions
    

            
        
    
    
        
            
                About NPR
                Diversity
                Support
                Careers
                Press
                Ethics
            
        
    


      Why Trump just loosened the rules on 'dyed diesel'   Trump is temporarily allowing this fuel to be used on highways, although it's typically just for off-road farm and construction vehicles. Could that lower the price of diesel?


         

    
        Business
    


      Why Trump just loosened the rules on 'dyed diesel' — normally a farm fuel
   
   
   




      
            
                  
    
            October 7, 20262:00 PM ET
    

      
      

   
   

   
            
                  
                        
                              
    
      
        
      
    
  
      
      Willa Rubin

In this aerial view, Dan Duffy uses a tractor to plant soybeans on land he farms with his brother on April 28, 2025 near Dwight, Illinois.
                
                    
                    Scott Olson/Getty Images North America
                    
                
                hide caption

Stay up to date with our Up First newsletter, sent every weekday morning.

Less than a month before the midterms, the price of fuel is becoming a powerful election issue.

This week, President Trump issued an executive order aimed at lowering costs for frequent diesel users by making a type of fuel called "dyed diesel" more accessible through the end of the year.

Could this lower the cost of diesel? Let's get into it.

Why is diesel so expensive right now?

Prices for all kinds of oil products have risen this year because fewer ships have been getting through the Strait of Hormuz and transporting crude to refineries worldwide — but the diesel supply chain has been uniquely hit. Ukraine's recent attacks on Russian refineries have taken many of them offline, and Russia has cut back on its diesel exports. China has, too.

It's added up to a limited supply of diesel — a fuel that powers much of the industrial supply chain.

Business 
            The price of diesel hits a record high 
         
         

      
      

   
   

   So its price has soared; the U.S. average for a gallon hit a record of $6.52 a few weeks ago. The price has eased a bit since then, but a gallon remains about $2.60 higher than this time last year, according to AAA.

When diesel prices rise, inflation is likely to follow, analysts say. Diesel powers much of the industrial supply chain, from agricultural equipment to trucks transporting goods from warehouses to grocery stores.

The "dyed" part means: red dye. "Red-dyed diesel is diesel with red dye in it. That's it," said Will O'Neill, principal analyst at S&P Global Energy and a follower of all things diesel.

Chemically, this diesel is almost identical to the regular kind you'd find in most gas stations. But it's a different color because it's used, and taxed, differently.

Red-dyed diesel is only meant for off-road vehicles, mainly farm and construction equipment — like a tractor that's used in a field. It's exempt from the federal tax of 24.4 cents a gallon on commercial diesel.

Economy 
            How a national farm leader is dealing with record diesel prices
         
         

      
      

   
   

   Drivers aren't suppose to use it in vehicles that drive on highways. People who do are subject to an IRS penalty — either $1,000 or $10 per gallon, whichever is more expensive.

The red color makes it easier to catch someone who filled up their tank with the wrong stuff. Using the red-dyed diesel is "effectively a form of tax evasion," O'Neill said.

But the new executive order says dyed diesel will be allowed on highways through the end of the year. The IRS won't penalize anyone who uses it.

It could help farmers, truckers and other workers who count on diesel to do their jobs. The executive order said this move would put money directly into their pockets "to support their vital service to our Nation."

Global Health 
            DIY fertilizer is a blessing as farmers face steep prices due to the Iran war
         
         

      
      

   
   

   It essentially expands the ways in which workers can use dyed diesel, sparing them the federal tax. Imagine a farmer who usually puts dyed diesel in their tractor — now they can also legally use it to fill up their cargo van, get on the highway, and take their produce to market.

Plus, a handful of states have said drivers can use red-dyed diesel on their highways. On average, state diesel taxes run about 35 cents a gallon. Allowing drivers to use dyed diesel — and skip both federal and state taxes — could add up to a savings of about 60 cents a gallon.

But because the cost of a gallon of regular diesel is now about $2.60 higher than this time last year, drivers will still be paying a higher price overall

Will this put more diesel on the market?

Technically, this will increase the total amount of diesel that people could use.

Business 
            School districts face a back-to-school math problem: The high price of diesel
         
         

      
      

   
   

   But Jaime Brito, executive director of oil markets at Dow Jones Energy, points out that this doesn't mean most people can easily access dyed diesel. It isn't available at most gas stations. "When was the last time that you went to a pumping station and you saw that one of the stations gave you the possibility to feed red diesel into your truck?" he asked.

Instead, people would need to go to a special wholesaler — or might be able to find it at gas stations in rural areas.

In an email to NPR responding to these critiques, White House spokesperson Taylor Rogers wrote that the president wants to see prices fall and is taking "historic measures" to alleviate oil supply disruptions.

Can the Trump administration do anything else to lower diesel costs?

Over the past month, some politicians have floated the idea of a diesel export ban. The idea was that if the U.S. stopped sending diesel to other countries, maybe that would temporarily increase the supply in the U.S., pushing down the price.

But bottom line: refiners pushed back. It would be bad business for them.

Refiners make money by selling diesel within the U.S. and exporting it around the world, said Jacques Rousseau, who focuses on  oil, natural gas, and refined products as  a managing director with Clearview Energy Partners.

National 
            The Iran war and tariffs are costing farmers. Will Republicans pay in November?
         
         

      
      

   
   

   If there was a diesel export ban, sure, that diesel would stay in the U.S. But then, refineries would wind up with a ton of extra diesel. "Then it'll start going into storage. And then once your storage gets filled, then you have to reduce the overall production of your refinery. So then you just start producing less of everything else too because you have nowhere to put this diesel," Rousseau said.

Ultimately, that could lead to prices for refined oil products, like gasoline — and diesel — going up.

President Trump said late Friday that he was not seriously considering an export ban, and that the U.S. didn't need one anymore, as Europe just released about 100 million barrels of diesel and crude oil from its own stockpiles.

Your Money 
            Here's the latest sticker shock: Borrowing for a mortgage — or a car
         
         

      
      

   
   

   Analysts told NPR that the only real fix will be ending the wars in Iran and Ukraine — until there's more oil flowing freely around the world again, they said, it's hard to see the price of diesel getting much lower. " There's no silver bullet," said O'Neill. "There's no way to snap your fingers and end up with $4 diesel before the election."

"Barring the rapid and credible conclusion of the wars," he continued, "I don't think that happens."

NPR does not offer or accept money for coverage or interviews.
                Anyone who makes such an offer or request is not an NPR employee and does not represent NPR.