URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/foreign-secretary-statement-on-the-uks-diplomatic-presence-in-jerusalem
TIME: VERIFIED gov.uk first_published 2026-10-08T07:13:24+01:00 = 07:13 BST
GOV.UK Foreign Secretary statement UK diplomatic presence Jerusalem

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Navigation menu
      


      
                    Menu

        
          Menu
      
      
        


            
              
                Services and information
              
              
                    
                      Benefits
                      
                    
                    
                      Births, death, marriages and care
                      
                    
                    
                      Business and self-employed
                      
                    
                    
                      Childcare and parenting
                      
                    
                    
                      Citizenship and living in the UK
                      
                    
                    
                      Crime, justice and the law
                      
                    
                    
                      Disabled people
                      
                    
                    
                      Driving and transport
                      
                    
                    
                      Education and learning
                      
                    
                    
                      Employing people
                      
                    
                    
                      Environment and countryside
                      
                    
                    
                      Housing and local services
                      
                    
                    
                      Money and tax
                      
                    
                    
                      Passports, travel and living abroad
                      
                    
                    
                      Visas and immigration
                      
                    
                    
                      Working, jobs and pensions
                      
                    
              
            

            
              
                Government activity
              
              
                    
                      Departments
                      Departments, agencies and public bodies

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

Reports, analysis and official statistics

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

Following discussions with the Government of Israel, our Consulate General building will not be closing, and will be known as the UK Mission, Jerusalem from today

The Foreign Secretary Ed Miliband said:

We have been clear that we do not accept that the Government of Israel has the legal right to close the British Consulate General in Jerusalem, which has been there for nearly 200 years. The UK government reiterates its long-standing view that East Jerusalem is occupied territory.

Following discussions with the Government of Israel, our Consulate General building will not be closing, and will be known as the UK Mission, Jerusalem from today. The UK Mission, Jerusalem is independent, operational, and will continue to deliver vital services and our work with the Palestinian people.

This will ensure that we maintain our longstanding British presence and the UK’s role in support of two state solution.

Without an understanding, we would not have the necessary assurances for the security and protections of our staff and premises. Accordingly, the UK has temporarily withdrawn a number of staff and families to ensure their safety and security.

We will work in the coming months to build back up our presence, and we will not take reciprocal action while such discussions are underway and credible.

The UK stands steadfast by the measures we took on 8 September, in concert with the international community, in support of a two-state solution to deliver peace and security for the people of Israel and Palestine.

The following links open in a new tab

Share on Facebook
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
        
          
            
                
                  
                
                      Share on X
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
    



          

          
                        



          
      

        
          
                      
  
      



      

    Explore the topic

  
        Peace and stability in the Middle East and North Africa

  




      

    World locations

  
        Israel
        Palestine

  






          
        
    
    
  


      
          

  

  
    
      
        Is this page useful?
        
          
            
              Maybe
          
          
            
              Yes this page is useful
          
          

            
              No this page is not useful
          
        
      
    

    
      Thank you for your feedback
    

    
      
        Report a problem with this page
    
  


  

  
    
      

      

      Help us improve GOV.UK
      Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
        Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript).