URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-and-germany-launch-joint-partnership-to-counter-sabotage-and-cyber-attacks
TIME: VERIFIED gov.uk first_published 2026-10-08T00:01:02+01:00 = 00:01 BST
GOV.UK UK and Germany joint partnership counter sabotage cyber attacks

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.

We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.

We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time.

Navigation menu
      


      
                    Menu

        
          Menu
      
      
        


            
              
                Services and information
              
              
                    
                      Benefits
                      
                    
                    
                      Births, death, marriages and care
                      
                    
                    
                      Business and self-employed
                      
                    
                    
                      Childcare and parenting
                      
                    
                    
                      Citizenship and living in the UK
                      
                    
                    
                      Crime, justice and the law
                      
                    
                    
                      Disabled people
                      
                    
                    
                      Driving and transport
                      
                    
                    
                      Education and learning
                      
                    
                    
                      Employing people
                      
                    
                    
                      Environment and countryside
                      
                    
                    
                      Housing and local services
                      
                    
                    
                      Money and tax
                      
                    
                    
                      Passports, travel and living abroad
                      
                    
                    
                      Visas and immigration
                      
                    
                    
                      Working, jobs and pensions
                      
                    
              
            

            
              
                Government activity
              
              
                    
                      Departments
                      Departments, agencies and public bodies

News stories, speeches, letters and notices

Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

Reports, analysis and official statistics

Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

Prime Minister Andy Burnham will travel to Berlin today for talks with Chancellor Friedrich Merz.

Prime Minister Andy Burnham will travel to Berlin today for talks with Chancellor Friedrich Merz, as the UK and Germany work together on technologies and industries that will drive growth in every UK postcode, and build resilience against shared threats.

The UK and Germany are Europe’s two largest economies and biggest investors in defence and today are committing to a counter-hybrid threat partnership to tackle the hostile activity that threatens security and prosperity in both our countries.

The hybrid threat from our adversaries – especially Russia – extends across Europe and beyond, threatening our collective security. The UK and Germany will jointly act on identifying and disrupting hybrid activity, wherever it comes from.

Sharing information, and coordinating action to monitor, deter and disrupt threats, the new joint-partnership will degrade hostile actors’ capacity to operate in Europe, and will build resilience against cyber-attacks, sabotage and threats to critical infrastructure.

Prime Minister Andy Burnham said:

Attacks on our infrastructure, our businesses and our democracies are not a distant threat. They reach into people’s homes and workplaces, and they are designed to make us weaker and more divided.

Britain and Germany are joining forces to find, expose and disrupt this activity. Security and growth go hand in hand, and both must be felt in every town and city in our two countries.

In their first face-to-face meeting, the Prime Minister and Chancellor Merz will also discuss the other major security and geopolitical challenges facing Europe. This includes support for Ukraine, responding to instability in the Middle East and addressing the impact of disruption to global trade routes such as the Strait of Hormuz.

As the UK resets its relationship with Europe, the leaders will discuss how closer cooperation with European partners can strengthen security, protect economic resilience and deliver shared prosperity.

The two leaders will also convene a UK-Germany Regional Growth Forum, bringing together British and German CEOs. The forum will focus on unlocking investment, strengthening industrial partnerships and ensuring that the benefits of growth are felt in communities across both countries.

Today’s announced measures build on the landmark 2025 Kensington Treaty, formally ratified today, which commits the two countries to deeper cooperation on science, technology, defence, security and growth.

The following links open in a new tab

Share on Facebook
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
        
          
            
                
                  
                
                      Share on X
          
            (opens in new tab)
          

        
    



          

          
                        



          
      

        
          
                      
  
      



      

    Explore the topic

  
        Foreign affairs

  




      

    World locations

  
        Germany

  






          
        
    
    
  


      
          

  

  
    
      
        Is this page useful?
        
          
            
              Maybe
          
          
            
              Yes this page is useful
          
          

            
              No this page is not useful
          
        
      
    

    
      Thank you for your feedback
    

    
      
        Report a problem with this page
    
  


  

  
    
      

      

      Help us improve GOV.UK
      Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
        Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript).