URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/videos/cmd6dv1446lno
BBC 08 Oct 06:18 (video page)

A vape shop has been forced to reinvent itself with a new tax on the horizon.

Vapers Cave in Bracknell sells vapes, but now also sells darts equipment too.

The Vaping Product Duty, AKA Vape Tax, will be imposed at a rate of £2.20 per 10ml of e-liquid. It comes into effect from April 2027, giving sellers a six month window to sell old stock at the pre-duty price.

Shop owner Daniel Buckland said: \"We are genuinely concerned will stay open with the tax coming on board, because of the concern and impact it would cause, we decided to diversify.\"

Paramount Skydance has officially taken over Warner Bros Discovery in a $110bn merger that is set to reshape Hollywood and the media landscape. The merger comes after months of legal disputes and widespread criticism over feared cuts and how consolidation could harm competition and consumers.

The newly merged entertainment giant will be rebranded as Skydance, and it will bring together a host of entities including HBO, CBS, Nickelodeon, Showtime, Comedy Central, DC Studios and Food Network.

The BBC's Samira Hussain explains what happens now after this historic merger between two of the biggest studios in Los Angeles.

US death row inmate Christa Pike is \"conscious and speaking\" after surviving a failed execution attempt in the US state of Tennessee last week. Pike continues to receive critical medical care while handcuffed in hospital, according to a statement from her attorneys on Tuesday.

An aneasthesiologist advising Pike's defence team said her survival is highly unusual, and while her prognosis remains unclear, \"at a minimum, we expect a long recovery\".

The BBC's Sarah Smith breaks down recent events after Pike's failed execution.

Hundreds of thousands of people have taken to the streets across France, as a wave of protests by high-school pupils spread to their parents, university students and unions.

Crowds of teenagers marched from the Place de la République in Paris, calling for more resources for schools, and what they called less repression from police.

Police clashed with demonstrators in Lyon, used tear gas in Paris and Marseille and water cannon in Rennes, but there was little of the serious trouble that marred previous protests.

The BBC's Europe correspondent Nick Beake reports from Lille.

Read more: Tear gas in Paris and Marseille as school protests grow across France

Three people have been arrested after a raid on a suspected criminal network believed to be behind dozens of fake asylum claims from people pretending to be gay.

It follows a BBC investigation earlier this year which revealed that law firms and advisers were helping migrants pose as gay in an effort to get asylum.

The BBC's Politics Investigations Correspondent, Billy Kenber, joined members of the Home Office Immigration Enforcement team as they looked to arrest the group's suspected ringleaders on Tuesday morning.

A large crowd with thousands of student protesters has gathered in Lille's Place de la République, in northern France.

Demonstrations are continuing across France on Tuesday against what protesters describe as under-investment in high schools.

The BBC's Europe correspondent Nick Beake, reporting from Lille amid the crowds, can see a strong police presence nearby but no signs of trouble so far.

Some protests over the past week in France have turned violent, as protesters and authorities clashed.

Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov has urged people not to \"listen to various rumours\" after a Russian lab technician died at a plague research centre in Siberia.

Peskov called for people to follow only information from Russia's public health watchdog, which named the official cause of death of the lab technician as pneumonia of unknown origin.

BBC Russia editor Steve Rosenberg also asked Peskov about US President Donald Trump's offer of support to Russia.

More on this story: US 'watching closely' after plague researcher dies in Russia

CCTV has captured the moment a sports shoe shop was torn apart by an explosion in the San Antonio area of Surabaya, Indonesian authorities have confirmed.

Police said five people had been taken to hospital following the incident that was “strongly suspected” to be the result of a gas leak, and no suspicious substances or explosives were found at the site.

They added that at least 41 buildings had been damaged by the explosion.

Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor has begun legal proceedings against Thames Valley Police over the lawfulness of the search warrants that led to his arrest in February.

The former Prince Andrew was arrested on suspicion of misconduct in public office, after information emerged regarding his dealings with convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein.

Mountbatten-Windsor's lawyers are challenging search warrants used to access the former Prince's residences' at Sandringham and the Royal Lodge in Windsor, as first reported by the Telegraph.

The BBC's Noor Nanji has what we know so far.

Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez confirmed Spain will be heading to the polls on 29 November, after Sanchez's Socialist party, which is currently heading a minority government, failed to pass housing reforms in the Spanish Congress.

Sanchez faces an uphill battle in his bid for re-election with polls showing Sánchez's Socialist party is trailing the conservative People's Party - which many expect to attempt to form a government with the far-right Vox.

In his statement announcing the election, Sanchez warned Spaniards about what he called the \"extreme-right wave\" being seen in other countries and said Spain should continue to be a global example of \"peace, feminism and prosperity\".

BBC correspondent Guy Hedgecoe reports.

Follow the BBC's live coverage following Sanchez's announcement.

Millions of Brazilians took to the polls on Sunday for the first round of the country's presidential elections.

President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, 80, is running for his fourth non-consecutive term in office, while his challenger, right-winger Flávio Bolsonaro, 45, is competing in his first presidential race.

His father, former President Jair Bolsonaro, governed Brazil from 2019 to 2022.

With the election now heading to a run-off on 25 October, BBC correspondent Ione Wells unpacks the results.

Major bridges in Ukraine have been the target of Russian strikes over the past four days, as Moscow ramps up attacks in Ukraine's capital city.

The Pivnichnyi (Northern) Bridge, has been hit for the second day in a row, while the Pivdennyi (Southern) Bridge was hit multiple times earlier this week.

The latest attack came as German Chancellor Friedrich Merz made a visit to Kyiv on Sunday.