URL: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/ckgp2e0rrj4o
TITLE: Burnham cleared to run for selection in pivotal by-election
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-15T18:05Z
AUTHOR: Kate Whannel (BBC Political reporter)

Greater Manchester Mayor Andy Burnham has been cleared to seek selection as Labour's candidate in a by-election which could pave the way for him to return to Westminster.

The BBC understands the by-election is likely to take place on 18 June.

STEVE REED (housing secretary, Starmer ally): "It's been a very difficult week but we need to take a breath now, take this weekend to reflect on what's going on, and come back next week and focus on the country we were elected to serve."

MIKE TAPP (Home Office minister, BBC Radio 4 Any Questions): apologised on behalf of the government — "I want to take this opportunity now, from my heart, to apologise to the public and to everybody in this room and every listener for what you are seeing. This is not what I was elected to do. Seeing what's unfolded in front of us over the last few weeks has been really, really painful for me."

WES STREETING (X post): welcomed Burnham — "We need our best players on the pitch."

KEMI BADENOCH (Conservative leader): "Andy Burnham wants to rock up and just be prime minister despite being out of Parliament for a decade."

RICHARD TICE (Reform UK deputy leader): would be "throwing everything possible" for a "seismic" win.

NEIL COYLE (Labour MP, BBC Newsnight): Burnham had been trying to replace Starmer "for a long time and frankly some of us are sick of it." NEC should block his candidacy; should "stand up to the ego of one man."

OLIVIA BLAKE (Labour MP, BBC Newsnight): Burnham "would be a great addition back into Parliament… he's done great things in Manchester. He can cut through in a way we have been failing to cut through."

KEY FACTS:
- Nearly 90 Labour MPs have urged Starmer to go.
- 5 ministers have resigned (counting cabinet + junior).
- Applications to enter the candidate selection process close Monday 18 May; selection meeting 21 May.
- Streeting allies say he has the support of the 81 Labour MPs needed for a contest.
