URL: https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2026/may/15/andy-burnham-pm-labour-autumn-conference
TITLE: Andy Burnham will push to become PM before Labour conference, allies say
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-15T17:56Z (updated 2026-05-16T04:13Z)
AUTHORS: Rowena Mason, Jessica Elgot, Pippa Crerar (The Guardian)

Andy Burnham will push to become prime minister in time to address Labour's autumn party conference in Liverpool, his supporters have said.

The Greater Manchester mayor cleared his first hurdle to becoming the candidate in the Makerfield byelection on Friday when Labour's ruling body gave him permission to stand for the seat.

If confirmed as Labour's choice, he will need to win a difficult contest for the Greater Manchester seat in mid to late June. Support for Reform UK surged in the area at the local elections.

With the byelection most likely to take place on 18 June, some of Burnham's supporters believe he has a path to becoming prime minister before parliament breaks for the summer recess, but sources close his campaign believe his preference is for a longer timeline.

Labour's deputy leader, Lucy Powell, who will be the political lead for the party in the byelection, told the Guardian she expected it "to really galvanise people from right across the party and we'll absolutely be throwing everything at it".

"Should he be our candidate, Andy's story, Andy's narrative, Andy's connection to the place will absolutely be at the forefront of it all," she said. "He is very much what keeps a seat like that in play for us."

She described the byelection as a "straight fight between us and Reform and exactly the sort of seat – a community and a place that perhaps once had more pride in itself than it does today – that you know feels that mainstream politics has not been listening to it enough and I think that's why someone like Andy is so popular in a place like Makerfield".

Last night the Times reported that Starmer was expected to approve an £18bn increase in defence spending as early as next week as he battles for political survival.

Steve Reed, one of his closest allies in the cabinet, conceded on Friday that the prime minister was unpopular, but insisted Labour should not repeat the same pattern of changing leaders that damaged the Conservatives.

Wes Streeting, who resigned as health secretary this week but stopped short of challenging Starmer, gave his backing to Burnham standing on Friday. "We need our best players on the pitch," he said. "There is no doubt that Andy Burnham is one of them."

Burnham is expected to set out his vision of "Manchesterism" next week — a politics of making people feel rooted and invested in their local areas — and how it could apply to the whole country.

Analysis by Survation shared with the Guardian suggests that with Burnham as the candidate Labour would narrowly beat Reform by 45% to 43% in Makerfield, compared with another Labour candidate attracting 27% versus 53% for Reform. The results were extrapolated using modelling from official election results, census data and survey data from the recent Gorton and Denton byelection.

The contest has the potential to be a symbolic battle for the future of the country, with Nigel Farage's Reform saying it will be fighting for the seat as hard as possible. The party's HQ is expected to select its candidate and there is understood to be concern that it will face competition for votes from a candidate put forward by Rupert Lowe's rightwing party Restore Britain.

Neal Lawson, a close adviser to Burnham, said he believed the Greater Manchester mayor had unique electoral appeal: "He appeals to both Green voters and Reform voters, and no one else does it."
