URL: https://understandingwar.org/research/middle-east/iran-update-special-report-may-15-2026/
TITLE: Iran Update Special Report, May 15, 2026
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-15
AUTHOR: Nadia Sleiman (ISW + Critical Threats Project at AEI)

KEY TAKEAWAYS (10 numbered points):

1. Senior Iranian officials continue to demand guarantees against future US-Israeli attacks as a precondition for negotiations, and the Iranian regime likely views recognised control over the Strait of Hormuz as one such guarantee.

2. The People's Republic of China (PRC) does not appear to have made a clear commitment to support US efforts to secure freedom of navigation through the Strait of Hormuz. Iran's assertion of control over the strait is inconsistent with the long-stated PRC position.

3. Iran may have decided to deprioritise certain restrictive measures in the Strait of Hormuz, such as toll collection, in order to encourage states such as the PRC to cooperate with Iran and implicitly recognise its control over the strait.

4. The Iranian regime is attempting to ease economic pressures from the US naval blockade on Iranian ports by preserving foreign currency, raw materials and updating import-system price references for rice and oil-based products.

5. The UAE announced on 15 May it will accelerate efforts to double export capacity in Fujairah to bypass the Strait of Hormuz.

6. Unspecified Western diplomats told Western media on 14 May that Saudi Arabia is discussing pursuing a potential non-aggression pact with Iran after the war.

7. The recent war has showcased the UAE's adoption of a more assertive posture against Iran amid its deepening security ties with Israel.

8. The US State Department announced on 15 May that Israel and Lebanon have agreed to extend the temporary ceasefire for an additional 45 days.

9. Iranian-backed Iraqi militia leaders are threatening to withdraw their support for new Iraqi PM Ali al Zaidi's government amid US pressure to deny Iranian-backed figures positions of influence.

10. US authorities charged senior Iranian-backed Kataib Hezbollah commander Mohammad Baqer Saad Dawoud al Saadi with planning attacks targeting civilians in the US, Canada, and Europe.

KEY QUOTES:
- IRGC Baghiyatollah Sociocultural HQ Commander Maj Gen Mohammad Ali Jafari (14 May): the United States must satisfy Iranian "confidence-building" measures before Iran will negotiate.
- US Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent: expecting the PRC to work "behind the scenes" to influence Iran to open the strait.

CENTCOM (per ISW): US forces have redirected 75 commercial vessels and disabled four since the blockade began on 13 April. (Al Jazeera Saturday updated this to 78 redirected.)

UAE: Abu Dhabi Crown Prince Sheikh Khaled bin Mohamed bin Zayed directed ADNOC to fast-track the West–East Pipeline project to increase UAE crude export capacity from Fujairah to as much as 3.6 million barrels per day by 2027.

ISW: Bloomberg reported on 15 May that the UAE unsuccessfully attempted to persuade fellow Gulf states, including Saudi Arabia, to participate in a coordinated attack on Iran shortly after the US-Israeli campaign began.
