URL: https://www.timesofisrael.com/porous-ceasefire-extended-for-45-days-after-third-round-of-israel-lebanon-talks/
TITLE: Porous ceasefire extended for 45-days after third round of Israel-Lebanon talks
PUBLISHED: 2026-05-15

The United States on Friday announced a 45-day extension of a porous ceasefire between Israel and Hezbollah in Lebanon, even as the Iran-backed terror group continued to clash with IDF soldiers and launch missiles and drones into Israeli territory.

The announcement came after Israel and Lebanon wrapped up a third round of negotiations in Washington, which was described by State Department spokesperson Tommy Pigott as "highly productive," adding that the truce extension will "enable further progress."

The third round, which lasted two days, included military officials from both sides for the first time, with Israel's acting defense attaché to the US Brig. Gen. Arik Ben Dov, and head of the IDF's Strategic Division Brig. Gen. Amichai Levin representing Israel.

The State Department will reconvene the political track of negotiations on June 2 and June 3, Pigott said. In addition, a security track will be launched at the Pentagon on May 29 with military delegations from both countries.

Lebanese Prime Minister Nawaf Salam said his country has had enough "reckless" wars for foreign interests, calling for Arab and international support in Beirut's negotiations with Israel, in a reference to Hezbollah launching two wars in support of Iran. Speaking at an NGO dinner, Salam said that he hoped to "mobilize all Arab and international support to bolster our position in the negotiations" with Israel, shortly after the truce extension.

ISRAELI STRIKES IN TYRE INJURE AT LEAST 37:
Lebanon's health ministry said Israeli strikes on the Tyre district wounded at least 37 people, including six hospital personnel, nine women, and four children on Friday. The IDF said earlier it launched airstrikes on Hezbollah infrastructure in the Tyre area, following evacuation warnings.

United Nations humanitarian coordinator for Lebanon Imran Riza condemned the "unacceptable" toll from continued attacks, saying that "diplomatic efforts now offer a critical opportunity to stop the violence."

Hafez Ramadan, a resident near the building targeted by the airstrike, said it had housed people who had fled their towns due to the war. "There are only women, children, and the elderly here," he said. "Because of this strike, people have been displaced again."

Nineteen IDF soldiers and one Defense Ministry civilian contractor have been killed in southern Lebanon amid fighting against Hezbollah.

In Lebanon, the Israeli military has said that it has killed over 2,000 Hezbollah operatives, including hundreds of members of the terror group's elite Radwan Force, since hostilities escalated amid the war with Iran. More than 5,000 Hezbollah targets in Lebanon have also been struck, according to the IDF.

During the fighting in Lebanon, which began on March 2, Hezbollah fired some 5,500 rockets at IDF troops operating in the south of the country, as well as around 2,500 at Israel, according to the military. There were at least 75 rocket impact sites in Israel. Hezbollah launched around 300 drones, of which 25 struck Israel.
